 If you say you're not a right-wing extremist, what would you describe it as?
 National conservative, I'd say. I think that's the best way to put it.
 What should such a naive viewer understand?
 That I believe in traditional things, like family. I believe in tradition.
 I believe that you can be proud of your country, in all the dark sides that history has had. You have to stand for that.
 Can you say everything you think in Brandenburg or in Germany that you think?
 You can say everything you think in Germany or in Brandenburg.
 Do you believe in the climate change made by the people?
 I believe that the people have a share, a very certain share in a climate change.
 But I believe that the share is so marginal that we in Germany will not save the climate
 because of this terror that is now exposed to the public.
 You can't drive a diesel anymore.
 Terror?
 You are not allowed to be a lethal terror, of course.
 You want to become prime minister. Who do you want to co-operate with?
 The NPD probably won't come in.
 I wouldn't co-operate with the NPD either.
 But with whom then? The others don't want to go with you.
 I think at the moment it is still the case.
 I think the tone of the CDU will change.
 We see how panicky the CDU is on the federal level,
 to limit itself.
 It doesn't work anymore.
 There is already good cooperation on many municipal levels.
 We'll wait a while.
 I think the tone of the CDU will change.
 And the rest is decided by the voters here in Brandenburg on September 1st.
 So, a new episode of Jung Naiv. We're in Potsdam. Where exactly?
 In the old Potsdam Castle. That's now the country hall.
 Who are you?
 I'm Andreas Kalwitz. I'm a top candidate for the AfD.
 I've been sitting here for five years in the country hall as a president of the faction
 and I'm also the head of the party in Bonnburg.
 And you want to become prime minister now?
 Well, that's up to the voters whether I want that.
 I want responsibility for this country to change something, otherwise I don't need to do politics.
 But responsibility would be best as prime minister, right?
 At best, sure.
 What does responsibility mean to you?
 Responsibility means that I can participate in processes to change things, to change decisions, to make decisions. That's what politics is about, otherwise I don't need to do it.
 Let's hear what you want to change and how. But first about Brandenburg.
 Many of our viewers may not be from Brandenburg and ask themselves why I should be interested in that now.
 Explain to us from your point of view what Brandenburg is.
 If a Bavarian or a North Rhine-Westphalian looks here and I know what to start with Brandenburg,
 how would you describe Brandenburg?
 Brandenburg is small.
 We also have relatively few inhabitants compared to Western countries.
 That's all right. I think what makes Brandenburg special, Brandenburg also has no large industry,
 you have to say that. I think Brandenburg makes it special, that it is a very stable country,
 it is very beautiful here, has an incredible number of lakes. I come from Munich myself,
 so I'm not a Brandenburgian at all. I love living here. So it's worth living in Brandenburg,
 even if there is nothing where you say,'s worth living in Brandenburg, even if there's nothing to say about other federal states.
 We don't have an Oktoberfest here.
 We have a spree forest for that.
 We have a lot of water, we have a lot of green.
 It's a beautiful country.
 Let's start with you. You say you're from Bavaria.
 How did that happen? Were you born there and then immediately came to Brandenburg after birth?
 Or how long did it take?
 No, I've only been here for 16 years.
 I moved there because of the family, because it's more relaxed here.
 We moved away from Munich, also because of the children.
 We don't regret it, we will do it again and again.
 Were you already politically active as a student?
 As a student relatively so at 17, 18. I went to the young union.
 I was also in the CSU for a a while. I was always interested in politics.
 Why CSU then? Why not SPD?
 There were also Greens, FDP.
 Because I was the Greens.
 It wasn't such a topic back then, especially in Bavaria.
 I'm conservative, that was clear.
 I then oriented myself towards someone
 who would represent it first.
 And it was the Junge Union in Bavaria
 and then the CSU. How long did it last?
 That was a few years, I don't know exactly, until 1993, that's a long time ago.
 How did it go on?
 Then I became a soldier for the first time, 12 years.
 You don't have that much time to do anything next to it.
 It's not like you say, okay, what am I going to do with my free time now?
 I was a false soldier for 12 years in the Bundeswehr.
 We decided to change our mind and went to Brandenburg.
 Did you go to another party after CSU?
 I was with the Republicans for a year, but it was a mislead course.
 They were considered right-wing extremists. Why did you join them?
 I wasn't interested in the For a year, I wasn't active as a civil servant. For a year, you have to attend an event every few weeks.
 So, it's not that different.
 Were you active? Did you get elected for the elections?
 No, I didn't.
 CSU?
 CSU, yes, as a member of the inner party.
 As a non-party, I was way too young.
 I think you need 50 years of prison time to get a post.
 I didn't have that.
 But as a member of the inner party, I was the usual district council,
 association committee, whatever that's called.
 I was the youngest Bavarian congressman in 1989.
 Before you went to the Bundeswehr, you were with the Republicans. Did you ever quit?
 I went out and went to the Bundeswehr.
 Why did you go to the Bundeswehr?
 Because I was interested in the challenge. I didn't just go to the Bundeswehr, I went to the Bundeswehr. I wanted to be a false juggler.
 That then attracted me and it worked and then I was a false juggler for 12 years. The challenge attracted me, the performance attracted me, false jumping also attracted me very much.
 I was also a six-year-old trainer, so I trained false jump for six years. It was a good time, it was good that I did it and it's good that it's over.
 Why was that a good time? Because it's an exciting time.
 There are also worse jobs than training people in a parachute jump all day.
 I thought it was good.
 How often did you jump on a parachute?
 A few hundred times in total.
 I don't know, as a trainee you jump a lot.
 I always liked to do it, even if it wasn't always accident-free.
 Now I don't do it anymore.
 And what about in the army? I mean, the foreign forces started in the late 90s.
 No, I wasn't in the foreign forces. That was one of the reasons why I went.
 You wanted to go abroad.
 I didn't want to go abroad, but I actually went because I was very critical of these foreign operations.
 What does the Bundeswehr actually do in Afghanistan?
 That was the point where I started to think about it.
 Do you go longer?
 And then I thought, okay, if you stay now, do you have to do that?
 And that just didn't speak to my conviction.
 Were you still politically interested, politically active during your time at the Bundeswehr?
 So I was always politically interested.
 I wasn't politically active because you don't have time there.
 So it's not like that, especially as a false leader. You're always in the service, actually.
 And when you fall into bed in the evening, you also know what you did.
 You don't pull that off and think hey, I'll do something political.
 But didn't you write any letters while you were there?
 At the Wittigobund, the Wittigobrief?
 That wasn't during the Federalist Party, it was before actually.
 That was 2001, where you wrote about the genocide against the German people.
 So it can be good that I have committed an article or something like that, but I wasn't really active.
 That was a right-wing, right-wing writing, the video letter. Why do you write that?
 That's not true. The constitution says quite clearly that there are right-wing extremist associations.
 You can argue about it, but there is no right-wing extremist classification.
 And there are, as many do in their youth, I've certainly done things that I wouldn't do today.
 That was the case back then. And I also agree with that, it's part of my biography.
 I can't distance myself from myself either, I don't do that either.
 That I wouldn't do things the way I did back then is another question.
 When did you get rid of these thoughts?
 Actually, at the end of my Bundeswehr time, I then stood up and thought to myself,
 children of course also play a role in starting to think about what is going on in this country,
 what does the future look like, what do you want to change? And I think you get more practical there.
 So you were kind of rumored. When did you leave the Bundeswehr? I left the Bundeswehr, I have to think briefly, in 2006, I think that's where you get more practical. So you were kind of rumored. When did you leave the Bundeswehr?
 I left the Bundeswehr, I have to think briefly, in 2006, I think.
 You were 12 years with the Bundeswehr?
 I was 12 years in the wrong year.
 And then, how did it go politically?
 Then nothing happened at first. You somehow have to earn money afterwards.
 Then I was a publisher. I founded a publisher. It was a super small publisher. We made audiobooks, so ballettrystic, many things with art.
 Actually, the publisher was a lust act. To be honest, it didn't pay off economically, unfortunately, because there was no more volume.
 And the problem was actually that the big ones, audiobook was always such a thing, no one was interested.
 And when the big ones came in, Amazon, Amazon came in, Battlesman came in and so on, then the small ones were actually flat. There There was no market anymore.
 You went into isolation?
 Exactly, yes. It was a pity, but a nice thing. I really enjoyed it.
 Was that your biggest downfall? To register for isolation?
 No, it was a tough experience. That's no question. In retrospect, you don't think about it that much at the moment.
 But when it's over, you think it's, it's also a good experience you've had.
 It makes you feel more relaxed.
 Have you experienced a major near-death experience in your previous life?
 So as long as my wife hasn't been divorced yet.
 I don't know. How often have you been married?
 Once. I've been with my wife for 25 years now, since she was 17.
 I don't know how she managed to keep it up.
 But the period of the war was 2009-2013, right?
 Exactly.
 After the Bundeswehr, you were in a camp of the Home-Trust German Youth.
 Yes, it wasn't a professional activity, it was a visit.
 But you said that by the end of the Bundeswehr period you had recovered from the thought and then you went to this neo-Nazi camp a little bit after the Bundeswehr.
 And they were, that was also such a group, they were even banned in 2009 because of that.
 Right, yes, I said that earlier, I looked at it.
 I said before that I'd rather make the picture myself.
 Wasn't mine, otherwise I would have done something.
 But what's interesting about going to such a neo-Nazi and looking at it?
 I think it's always much easier to judge it afterwards,
 if you look at it retrospectively and say, yes, you could have known,
 you always said, you had a bicycle chain.
 Back then it was a thing where I thought, well, look at what they're doing there.
 I was interested, I agree.
 It was maybe a wrong visit, whatever, but I think that ...
 Maybe?
 You can judge it that way or that way. The question is, I don think that's easy. You can do that or something.
 The question is, I don't see it either.
 You're not sorry?
 In retrospect, I'm actually sorry.
 What kind of a xenobar is being made that you once visited the wrong event and that
 now it is cooked up every time until the doctor comes.
 It's something special.
 You could become the next Prime Minister Brandenburg and have a neo-Nazi past.
 We are, we only know that from Austria with Strache.
 So first of all I have no neo-Nazi past. If I hadn't been at the federal government for 12 years,
 I would have received such a statement from the minister and they would have fired me out of there.
 What is actually the case is that I have individual connections there.
 I'm also in there, I don't do much about it and that was the case there.
 But what interested you in the beginning?
 In retrospect you say, okay, it was nonsense,
 but what was so interesting in the beginning?
 Just to look at it.
 Curiosity. I'm incredibly curious.
 Otherwise I wouldn't do politics.
 I think it's about the Führerkult and SS-Ruins and Holocaust denials at a camp like that.
 But what else was it about?
 Well, that's not how it was. I have to say, so crazy, otherwise I would have noticed that immediately.
 You would have said goodbye immediately, right?
 Yes, that's not mine, then it wouldn't have been, that's for sure.
 It wasn't mine either, otherwise I would have stayed with it.
 Did you do anything like that afterwards?
 I have to be sharp now, you probably have the better list than me.
 I still have it published for the Junge Freiheit, that was before.
 But that's all relatively...
 You wrote a contribution for Fritz, that's also a right-wing extreme young national team from Germany.
 That was before.
 I don't remember after that anymore. But you know better?
 Yes, I mean, you were also chairman of the club...
 Magische Verein der Tote.
 The club Kultur und Zeitgeschichte, Archiv the time, a right-wing extreme club.
 Yes, that's also wrong. There is an assessment by the Federal Office of the Federal Constitution in Bavaria, where they say there is no distance from right-wing extreme thought.
 And they also write that the club has not shown any activity for years at that time, but this club has never been classified as right-wing extremist.
 There is Hajo Funke, the recognized right-wing extremist from the board.
 He says it is clearly right-wing extremist and whoever is in the chair has to be one.
 You were with a NPD leader at the board at the time.
 The assessment of who is right-wing extremist or not is still not met in Germany by the constitutional Germany and not some Hajo Funke.
 That's why it's not that significant for me. Although it's also clear how politically he is positioned.
 In that respect, I don't care.
 What the constitutional protection says is much more important, I think.
 And that's the way it was said.
 But in contrast to this camp visit, you were in the chair for five years.
 What did you do there?
 Nothing. Otherwise the constitutional protection wouldn't have write that. There were no activities for years.
 Why did you go in there? Why did they need you as chair?
 I was just asked to keep this club alive. You lose that somehow.
 You have to give away the donations somehow. I don't know. I didn't do anything.
 I even officially recognized that if you want. And in that respect, it was a ... it just happened.
 Do you feel sorry to have the chairman?
 In retrospect, you would do a lot of things differently, but life doesn't work that way.
 So you knew that the founder of the club was SS-Hauptsturmbannführer and NPD-Waldemar Schütz?
 So I knew that he had founded this club.
 I didn't know the exact biography yet.
 That was also a time when he He was already dead when I joined.
 So with the same argument you could say
 who is in the CDU today.
 If you look at the people who were in the CDU shortly after the war
 or in the 50s, 60s, I was still fluent,
 you could say how many NSDAP members were there.
 So the argument doesn't quite draw.
 I like to measure what I've done afterwards. I agree with that.
 I'd like to talk about that.
 You had the presidency of the right-wing extremist association while you were sitting here in the parliament?
 I gave it up relatively late, that's true.
 After it came out?
 Yes, but I didn't take it into account. Nothing happened.
 Anything else we need to know?
 Nothing that comes to mind.
 You have something else in mind.
 Have you ever been violent in your youth?
 No, I haven't been violent.
 Why not?
 Because I didn't have a reason.
 Why should I be violent?
 You often get the right-wing extremist, who argues with left-wing extremists,
 even clobber and so on.
 First of all, I'm not a right-wing extremists, and even beating them up, etc. So, again, I'm not a right-wing extremist.
 The longest time I've worked politically
 before the AfD was in the CDU and the
 Young Union. I didn't find them so right-wing extremists.
 And I actually, even if it's boring,
 never beat them up for political
 reasons. And physically I could
 kill myself as a false mega for 12 years.
 Speaking of
 right-wing extremism, a few
 months ago it came out that there is a right-wing extremist network in the Bundeswehr.
 Hannibal, did you hear about it? Did that surprise you? I mean, you were in the Bundeswehr for 12 years.
 I read about it, but I've been out for a while. It's been 13 years. I don't know what's going on there. I read about games, but I don't know much about it.
 Did you notice that there were right-wing extremists among your soldiers?
 No.
 You were also a trainer.
 No, we didn't have that problem.
 Where there were problems, there was a military detachment service.
 People looked closely at it.
 By the way, I did too.
 And it came to the conclusion that there was nothing to do with right-wing extremism.
 And where there were problems, people were released.
 Where do you see right-wing extremism problems in Germany at the moment?
 There are several levels, of course, it is diverse. We still have a right-wing extremism problem, also in Brandenburg, with increasing violence rates.
 This is also available nationwide.
 That's why we are the only ones in Brandenburg who have demanded the protection of the constitution,
 funny, who wants to observe us for political reasons, to stop, to give more personnel.
 Because we said, right-wing extremism must be fought in the same way as left-wing extremism and islamist extremism.
 We see a certain one-sidedness, but where right-wing extremism remains a problem, you have to fight it very clearly.
 How did you react when you heard about the murder of Walter Lübcke?
 I first thought of the family, because I see it as a father, when you think about what happens to you when something like this happens.
 What about the children, what about the family? I find that totally disgusting.
 I also found it totally disgusting in the background, also with regard to the family, how it was then instrumentalized in political parties.
 How everyone tried to use it somehow.
 Also your party?
 All sides. Always where it was used, I think that's disgusting.
 I don't like it because at some point a person died.
 I think your party said, among other things, if the refugees and the migration flow
 didn't come, he would still live.
 You wouldn't say that?
 That's totally perfidious.
 Violence or murder above all, you don't have to sort that out now, is never a means
 of politics, it must never be and be and it's not justified by anything.
 No matter where someone is politically standing.
 I mean, you were at the march in Chemnitz, at the mourning party, there are also people running behind you, including this Stefan E.
 So first of all, it was not a march of protest, but a march of mourning that was completely peaceful. And yes, that's true, I also learned afterwards.
 To be honest, I didn't know any of the 8,000 people personally.
 But do you know him?
 No.
 He's as old as you.
 Yes, that may be. There are a lot of people in the republic as old as me.
 There are not so many neo-Nazis, maybe they know each other.
 I'm not a neo-Nazi. I don't know him.
 But maybe from earlier times.
 I don't know him from earlier times either.
 Are they identitarian right-wing extremists?
 The constitution leveled it down.
 I think you have to follow this level.
 That's why we have a clear unification list in the AfD.
 That we say that members of the IB and activists are not compatible with the AfD.
 That's why there are no members who are
 ibelas that is quite clear for us i can be at the ib and from one day to the other
 exit or not even do it and then work for you, for example, so it is important
 that someone believes that someone makes it believable that he has solved it and it
 goes now you have to make a difference between people who have been active for years
 and had functions or leadership jobs
 or if someone has participated in an action
 and said afterwards, it's not my thing.
 What should you do with the people?
 Press a firework on their foreheads and they are never allowed to do anything again?
 You have a colleague, Mr. Laubach,
 who was active for the Identitarian for years,
 also led fan shops and so on, and was not there from one day to the next,
 but now active in the parliament.
 So it's not quite like that either. He wasn't active for the IB for years,
 and his clothing shop he made there had nothing to do with the IB either.
 It was always calculated that way. i don't deal with people who
 have not distanced themselves faithfully and who and i have already had that someone
 said yes okay is no problem then still did something at the eb and that
 flew out and he did something before that is then no reason or if he
 distanced himself faithfully and if he no longer stand out anymore, if I say listen, that's not possible.
 How do you stand on that?
 There is only either or.
 There can't be both, AFD or IB.
 There are no cutbacks.
 But I'm against it, that you're so brutally sharing a fight, that you say, okay, someone took part in a demo 19 times.
 And now he has to get this fire iron pressed on his forehead to never be allowed to do anything again.
 I find that a bit awkward.
 If we look to the left, they are doing a lot easier.
 You have to be honest, no one is getting angry that some leftist RAF, former RAF murderers, are somehow busy as employees.
 But there are already cutmen.
 Selner was a friend of days at Kubitschek.
 They were guests and exchanged ideas. The series are made up.
 Kubitschek is considered the father of identity movements.
 But Kubitschek is not the AfD.
 The fact that Selner...
 That's the association chain principle.
 Someone knows someone who knows someone who knows someone.
 You don't just know Kubitschek, Höcke,
 you are closely connected.
 So we are not closely connected, we have a very good relationship, that is no secret.
 Also a critical one, by the way.
 That doesn't mean that one automatically carries everything that the other tells or thinks.
 But that's why I don't know everyone well who knows Kubitschek well.
 So I don't know him.
 How do you see Kubitschek critically?
 He is a publisher, he is not a politician.
 He is a publisher. I think he is a very good publisher, he's a really smart guy, I think.
 He publishes right-wing extremists and Nazis, right?
 He publishes not right-wing extremists and Nazis, the publisher is not classified as right-wing extremist.
 That's up to the viewer's eyes.
 If everything is left-wing from the SPD or from the CDU or is somehow Nazi, then you can see that.
 But he doesn't do that. And I don't have the list of the authors.
 So I'm not responsible for what he does.
 But how do you see him critically?
 I see him critically where it's about areas where you say to yourself,
 intellectually you can think a lot, but what does it mean politically?
 The discussion may be a bit too far, but an intellectual has different possibilities than a politician.
 For me, I have to see what is the art of the tangible.
 What do I actually want to do for this country?
 What do I want to do for the people out there?
 And that interests me.
 And that's why there are two worlds.
 Publishing is a completely different world or something.
 This Institute for State Policy is a completely different world than a party.
 But you've been talking there for a long time and you've been on his event.
 Yes, when I'm invited.
 I've also been on somewhere else.
 Then I do that too.
 Are there limits for you where you wouldn't perform?
 So everything that is anti-democratic.
 What do you understand from it?
 IB. If the IB invites me, if the NPD, it's actually superfluous to say that.
 You don't have to talk about it, it doesn't matter.
 These are constitutional enemies, the people. And that's also big line of separation. There's an attempt to wipe it all out,
 because arguments are no longer enough.
 Now they're trying to use the Nazi trap.
 The difference between us and some others is clear.
 We stand for democracy. Yes, we want to change many things.
 No question about that. But we don't want to change a system.
 We don't want to abolish democracy as a system.
 And that's the difference. Others want that. The NPD wants that, for example.
 They want to abolish the system. We don't want that.
 But we'll hear what you want to change. But if you say you're not a right-wing extremist, what would you be?
 How would you describe that?
 So, nationally conservative, I would say. I think that's the best way to put it.
 But what should such a naive viewer understand?
 That I believe in traditional things, like family.
 I believe in tradition.
 I believe that you can be proud of your country,
 in all the dark sides that the story had.
 You have to stand for that too.
 I believe that a more relaxed approach to Germany
 is good for many people.
 And I believe that conservative means that it is important to hold on to things that have been proven to be true without closing in on new things.
 There are also many good new things and the world is changing constantly. And that's what this term means to me.
 How does the national social fit in what you said, what you should strive for as a national conservative? I didn't say that, but there was an article about this lecture
 that was written. I told the journalist,
 listen to the lecture carefully, you won't find this word.
 Do you avoid that?
 No, I don't want to.
 It's not about terms.
 The attempt is in terms that somehow
 national, social sounds like Nazi.
 It's about me thinking about how I get the interests of my country in a relationship with a justice that is missing.
 And if you say that the tradition is national and the justice is social and it is somehow national-social, then they are actually stupid concept games.
 It's about content. And when it comes to
 fighting poverty, that people don't have to collect bottles to get out,
 if that's social, then I'm happy. Also child poverty, we might
 come to that in Brandenburg, is a huge topic. Every fifth child is
 at risk of poverty in Brandenburg and that's why I'm social. What kind of human image is based on your politics?
 That's a very interesting question. I believe that people are able to learn.
 I believe, and now I quote Frank-Walter Steinmeier, I thought that was a really good
 renewal of language, who once said, we have to learn again to talk to each other without
 a foam in the mouth. Now it's always the case that different positions in other countries are more relaxed.
 In Great Britain, for example, my wife is British, in Great Britain or in America it is more relaxed.
 You can have a different opinion, but don't judge people right away.
 That you say, oh, he has the wrong opinion, bad person.
 That's different in Germany. So here I am currently experiencing a lot of hysteria, even in the debate.
 And you can argue about content, I don't have a problem with that.
 But to separate that from the personal and to regulate that down,
 and my human image is that this should be possible.
 I believe in it.
 So if I weren't mercilessly optimistic, I wouldn't do the job.
 What are your values, your political values?
 My political values are definitely these conservative aspects like family.
 I believe in family. I think family is great. I am also the father of three children.
 I believe in traditions. That doesn't mean that you are hiding.
 I believe in rules. I believe in rules and laws.
 That a coexistence is only possible if everyone follows certain rules.
 And you don't have to believe them. They are there.
 They are already there, but you have to believe them when a constant violation of the rules is taken and nothing happens.
 I think that society is falling apart a bit at the moment. That's why we also experience two strong poles.
 The Greens will be totally strong, the AfD will be very strong and in the middle the whole CDU, SPD.
 Actually nobody knows what they stand for anymore.
 You've already said family a few times. What does family mean to you?
 Family means that you stand up for each other. Family means that you take care of each other. And family is just nice.
 But what is family and what is not family? Mother, father, child, is it a family?
 That is definitely a classic family.
 With two fathers and a child?
 That can also be a family, that's not the question.
 Really?
 Yes, of course.
 At the slaughterhouses you said that it is a degenerate family picture.
 It is not the guideline that we follow, but it is not about
 discriminating against people who have a different design, but it is about
 saying what is our guideline?
 The guideline is the classic family, that's not a problem.
 But it's not about people who have a different design.
 Our federal president of the federal government, Alice Weidel,
 also lives with a woman and has children.
 That's completely okay.
 So you have nothing against LGBT rights,
 equality of homosexuals in Germany?
 The equality of rights has already been achieved,
 that's completely fine.
 We are against the equality of marriage,
 the classic family,
 but it's actually a formal legal aspect,
 because practically the rights are there,
 as far as taxes are concerned,
 as far as possibilities are concerned.
 It's not about discriminating someone,
 but it's about saying,
 okay, what is the classic model of the leadership?
 And others can have other models.
 It's not about living in a country where you're governed by the bedrooms. I don't feel like it myself.
 But it's about having a value system where we say, okay, we want to orient ourselves in this way.
 That there are deviations from the norm is completely okay. That's acceptable.
 You don't want to change anything.
 What?
 You don't want to change anything.
 About what exactly?
 About this system of values and how we define family nowadays.
 I don't want to change anything about the system.
 Of course, as the AfD, we want to bring this classic family back to the forefront.
 We want to create incentives that make family something beautiful.
 Many can't start a family.
 That's a financial risk.
 Children are a risk of poverty in our country.
 And we want to change that, of course.
 We want to take the family into account again, especially children.
 That we say, hey, we are a child-friendly country.
 Unfortunately, that is no longer the case today.
 We have already asked for things quite specifically.
 We said, hey, why do baby products cost 19% and not 7%?
 All possible miscellaneous costs cost 7%.
 Baby items would% taxed.
 We want to get rid of it. And a few things in that direction too.
 So very concretely, where do we get relief? It's often about money.
 Do you see the birth rate in Brandenburg is too low?
 The birth rate in Brandenburg has increased a bit. But you have to look at it carefully.
 If you look at the numbers, who gets how many children, in general it is too low.
 How many children do you have?
 I have three.
 Are there any more coming?
 No, we are through. We will not be able to do the demographic change alone.
 Do they also live in Brandenburg or are they in your home in Bavaria?
 No, our home is Brandenburg.
 I could have said that you still have a home in Munich?
 A different home?
 Have you been traveling for 16 years? No, that's too stressful for me.
 No, we've been here since 16 years. The children grew up here.
 The children are from Brandenburg.
 My wife is a native British, but she grew up in NRW.
 They have to talk in three languages at the kitchen table.
 If they want a sandwich, they say to me, semmel, to my wife, Brötchen, and then they say, Schrippe.
 But is Bayern your home now?
 No, in the meantime, Brandenburg is my home.
 But does it all belong together? Is Germany your home too?
 Germany is certainly my home, but Germany is also very different.
 It was a good time in Bavaria. I'm always happy to be there. I also have family there.
 But in the meantime, Brandenburg has become my home. I'm always happy to be here, I still have family there, but in the meantime Brandenburg has become my home.
 I'm very happy here because I think people are more relaxed.
 Why?
 I think that's the turning point experience. They've already experienced how it is when something really drastic changes.
 You get new currencies and all these things and you notice one thing, life goes on.
 The experience is not there in the West, that's not a accusation, it's just a thing of the past. And I experience the people in Brandenburg, sometimes they are a bit cringy at the beginning, in Bavaria you would say they are a bit grumpy.
 But when you get behind this facade, it's very warm, very open. So we feel really at home here.
 What about your school time in Bavaria in the GDR? I heard there were always class trips to the ddr so
 with us the thing was a bit more complicated i wasn't on class trips to the ddr i'm
 such a general german mixture so i'm not a total wessi my mother came from the east
 and then fled when the wall was built there was still so wire so free street was so that
 bahnhof free street was divided in the middle one side east west so
 barbed wire and the soldiers are always so side was east, the other was west and in the middle was barbed wire.
 And the soldiers always ran from one end to the other.
 And then my mother sewed in her entire testimonies, such a skirt, and then fled to the west.
 But she completely grew up in the GDR.
 Was also in the FDJ, the entire program, studied in Görlitz.
 And for us at home there was actually no separation.
 Because I was already a small child, we were always over there, as they said.
 And I never understood the division, I also never understood all this Ossi-Wessi stuff.
 Because I always found the division abnormal.
 For us, the one half of the family lived in the west, the other in the east.
 And I found the division abnormal, even as a small child.
 You went shopping, I didn't realize that they immediately recognized you as a West child.
 The ones wanted to have a Westmark, then you couldn't pay with Westmark again, I didn't understand as a child.
 But I realized something wasn't right there.
 That's why I was very happy about the German unity, which was also a family story.
 We saw our relatives without having to go through these border controls or being pulled out of the VW bus by the dirty carpet.
 And then asked each other if they wanted to rent out the
 stock goods and stuff like that.
 We were happy about it.
 How did you experience the changes? What did you do that evening?
 I went to school and was in Berlin.
 From Munich, right?
 Yes, we drove up a few days earlier. You already noticed that something was happening there.
 Your family?
 No, only me. I didn't have a family then, I was 18.
 You're alone from Munich by train?
 We sat on a train.
 We sat in a train with a few friends and thought to ourselves, okay, what do you want to tell your children?
 Do you want to tell your children that something really crazy is happening, something historical, and you can be there, but you don't participate because you have to go to school?
 And then we said, no, we won't do that.
 Then we got on a train and drove up and had a great time in Berlin.
 Then you noticed, there was the press conference with Ulbricht and then you went to Bornholmer Straße?
 Ulbricht is a few years earlier.
 I don't remember his name, he's not here yet.
 Thomas Schabowski with this report. Ulbricht was up to 60. I'm not that old now.
 No, that was Schabowski from this note. It was actually just a false report, I shouldn't that old either. No, that was Schabowski, from this note.
 It was actually just a false report, I shouldn't say that yet.
 I don't even know exactly how it went.
 But that was the initial ignition.
 And then the wall opened.
 And that was a crazy atmosphere.
 It was a completely crazy atmosphere.
 Is that a different country now?
 Since the change?
 Is Brandenburg different from 1989 in 2019?
 Well, of course. Positive and negative.
 Shortly after the change, the DPR was left behind.
 A lot was under-developed, a lot was broken.
 But a lot of things worked.
 What is being told now, what I also experienced back then,
 when I was visiting, was the strengthening of cohesion.
 People helped each other more.
 I think that's what many people miss now.
 That they say, we're doing better
 and you can go to the supermarket and have
 87 types of yoghurt and
 broccoli, papaya, lemonade.
 But the human cohesion is not so good anymore.
 And you couldn't fall through the social network.
 You can do that today.
 Did you think at the time at the border that you would be the prime minister of one of these new
 federal states? No, not guaranteed. At the time I thought at the border
 that the money would be enough to get home. Did someone like you think about you at the time?
 So, like, he wants to get into politics, he wants to become prime minister.
 Did you think that was good? So top politicians. I don't understand the question.
 Did I think about me? Yes, like I thought about myself. How did Andreas think about the top ones in 1989 and now you are also part of it.
 I didn't think that far, I think. I thought that I would participate in something great and that you have to be there.
 And we also had a lot of fun because of the good atmosphere. But I didn't think about politics, party politics or prime minister.
 Did you also write down who the people are?
 Possibly yes, of course.
 Who is the people?
 The people is how it is defined in the constitution.
 It is defined by citizenship, by language, by culture.
 I think the definition in the constitution is sufficient.
 So the German people is described?
 The state people, of course.
 The founding fathers of the constitution made that into a head and brought it to paper.
 But the people is not the population?
 No, the people doesn't have to be the population.
 A part of the population can become a people.
 We've had that for centuries.
 But you have to limit that.
 And that's why it's always tested individually.
 There are 83 million people in Germany recently.
 Who is the people then? I can't quantify that. I are 83 million people in Germany. Who is the people?
 I can't quantify that. I don't know them all personally.
 Not everyone who lives here?
 The people are not everyone who lives here.
 Everyone who lives here, who stays here, is the population.
 The people are less because of those who have a German passport.
 That's clear.
 And those who are German citizens, they are also allowed to vote.
 Now we can also vote for EU citizens, that's right.
 On the municipal level.
 Right, on the municipal level. And they also belong to the people.
 Then it's right if EU citizens can also vote in the parliamentary elections.
 I don't think that's good.
 Why?
 Because I think that the people,
 so if they live here permanently, they can accept German citizenship.
 I think the word is integration. But they live here and pay they can accept a German citizenship. I think the word is integration.
 But they live here and pay taxes here in Brandenburg.
 So you would have to decide.
 If they have integrated and then accept a German passport,
 that's how it's regulated by law so far.
 I also agree with this legal regulation.
 Then that's okay.
 But to refuse to say EU citizens are also allowed to vote for the Landtags- and Bundestags to say EU citizens are allowed to vote for the
 national and federal elections and I am allowed to vote for Paris or London, I don't think that's right.
 If you live there and you have a tax rate, why not?
 Then I can become a British and then I really like to vote.
 You just mentioned integration. When is one integrated in Germany from your point of view?
 I think it's about recognizing rules. So you can sum up under the term
 sub-summation of culture. If I go somewhere else, I also stick to the rules.
 I think it's about language.
 I think language is the most important means of integration to get through everyday life.
 And it's about respect for those who already live in the country.
 I do that when I'm on vacation.
 I also respect that.
 Sometimes I can come across customs and customs that are strange in my opinion.
 Nevertheless, I respect them.
 If I don't do that, I don't need to go to the country.
 The age of the election is still 18. Are you in favor of lowering the age of the election?
 No, we're not in favor of that.
 No.
 So that 16-year-olds can vote for the AfD?
 It's already going on.
 It wouldn't be bad for us, to be honest. If we look at the numbers, there were these junior elections in Brandenburg,
 and there we are, the AfD in Brandenburg, in Saxony and in Thuringia,
 I have to say, Thuringia was still there,
 we are after the Greens, I think in Saxony the AfD is the strongest force
 at the U18 elections at schools and in Brandenburg the second strongest force.
 So in that sense, that's no argument against it.
 But we believe that it makes sense to set the age at 18,
 that people are mature enough to make such a decision.
 And also to this whole influence moment of the school,
 rather not always, have already been withdrawn.
 Because we know that today, a lot of politics is also done in schools.
 You've been in the parliament for five years now.
 Right. What have you learned about our democracy in those five years?
 I learned that democracy can sometimes be exhausting and very formal.
 I think we have far too much bureaucracy within democracy.
 But you like order too?
 I like order too, but the boundary between order and overregulation is already running.
 And there are processes like that and I think a there are a lot of people suffering in the country.
 That you have ten forms for every shit you have to fill out.
 I have learned that democracy is not practiced as it is postulated, as it is told.
 For example, when applications come from other parties parties, we look at them and say,
 is the content good or bad? And if it's a good content, we agree to it.
 We don't care if the application is from the left, from the Greens, from the SPD, we don't care.
 Either the application is good or bad. With the others it's different.
 Everything we apply for is rejected. They also say it openly, it comes from the AfD.
 So it's not about policy, it's about party politics.
 I think that's a cheeky thing, because the whole circus is about the tax payer.
 That's why it's important to us to do policy.
 That's why we vote for applications that are good for the others.
 We all vote against it. We can also demand fresh air for everyone.
 We will also vote against it, because it comes from the wrong people.
 I don't think not how democracy works.
 And I don't think that democracy works in such a way that in the meantime almost a quarter of the voters
 is somehow excluded and declared to be Nazis or idiots.
 I don't think that's democratic.
 You have to recognize results that you don't like.
 I do too.
 Give us an example where you have agreed with the other parties
 what is now law in Brandenburg?
 I have in the city council in Brandenburg now not or law in Brandenburg, for example
 the application of Rot-Rot, which they then at some point also brought in the
 to set up the positions for constitutional protection.
 And there are a lot of stories where we, it's very subject-oriented.
 I have my SVV ...
 In five years, implemented?
 No, it is not implemented.
 There are already several, but I don't have it all in my head.
 So we have a lot of plenary sessions.
 And I don't have the individual voting and the individual voting behavior in my head anymore.
 But it's always about making decision in a factual way and never ideologically.
 So these are not your enemies who are sitting with you in the parliament?
 Humanly, they are not my enemies anyway, because I don't even know them personally.
 Politically? Politically they are opponents, not enemies. who are sitting with you in the parliament. They are not my enemies in any way, because I don't even know them personally.
 Politically?
 Politically they are opponents, not enemies.
 It's about convincing internally.
 We do that in the election campaign.
 It's about fighting with good arguments to win the votes.
 Political opponents, enemies always sounds like destruction.
 They are not enemies.
 But political opponents they are in any case.
 Can you say everything in Brandenburg or in Germany?
 You can say everything you think in Brandenburg or in Germany once. That's incredible.
 I think we have a crazy narrowing lot of people off. That many people can't say what they really think anymore,
 what it means right away, up to these hysterical numbers.
 Don't say Moorenkopf, don't say Zigeunerschnitzel, oh God, oh God.
 I think that's boring for many people.
 And they think about it, and that's also the atmosphere in the East,
 that they say, hey, in 89 we didn't go out on the street and wanted this change, wanted freedom,
 so that you have to think again now, who am I telling something to, what can the children in school tell, do they have disadvantages?
 And that's a mood, I think that this is based on freedom of opinion.
 That there are many people who are not of the opinion that you can say anything you think.
 We are talking about non-criminal things now. We also have criminal laws that ban things for good reasons.
 There must be limits to that. But I think that many people are now behaving very correctly because they have to, not because they want to.
 You too?
 I don't. I don't have to anymore. I'm the bad guy anyway.
 But would you like to say more things that you think?
 No, I say the things I think. Everything is okay with me.
 At the Kif-Häusern you speak differently than at the Landtag.
 That's right. That's another event.
 One is a parliamentary story, where it's about making decisions on bills and laws.
 And the other is, in the election campaign it's something else.
 But that's completely normal, everyone does that.
 I also talk differently on a birthday party than...
 Did you have to bite your lips sometimes? In a parliamentary discussion or in a talk show or something?
 Sometimes. I don't have that many talk shows yet.
 Give me a situation where you think
 I would like to say that, but
 better not. There are debates
 in the parliament, when there are such
 arguments and where I think
 that's so negligible and that's
 actually ridiculous. And then I would like to say that.
 You think it's ridiculous. Yes, it's ridiculous.
 But actually not. Actually I have to say
 I think I say everything
 I think. But would you be for it? You probably have many voters who would like to say everything they think they should do.
 So nobody has suggested to me, in general not, and from my voters not, that I lack a clear German.
 I think it's okay. You don't have to argue, many who run with Pegida, whether they live in Brandenburg or
 in Saxony, they sometimes shout things that are not punishable, because freedom of expression
 is wide, but still not politically legitimate.
 I'm talking about these statements.
 Okay, that defines who is politically legitimate.
 That's the first thing.
 The politics, that's a social debate.
 But debate is fluid. And one. The politics? That's a social debate. But debate is fluid.
 And what is the politics?
 The politics is the sum of the parties.
 We are only a quarter of that.
 Yes, if the others say that doesn't belong.
 Okay, again. Who defines what is not legitimate?
 The society.
 The society in the homogeneous...
 Is there a homogeneous society?
 Definitely not.
 Then the model won't work.
 So the non-homogeneous society defines what is politically legitimate. That's your statement.
 Yes, but of course there is a dispute about it. If there is protest with violins and Merkel on the wall and so on, then it's not politically legitimate.
 Then it's tasteless, definitely. And therefore not politically legitimate.
 But that's up to the viewer. Legitimate means that I, the people...
 Illegitimate is illegal, it's unlawful, you're not allowed to.
 But the question is, you're throwing the problem on yourself. Who defines that?
 And I do believe in freedom of speech. That doesn't mean that you have to cover up any idiotic opinion through freedom of speech.
 And the only thing that sometimes, whether it's in debates with political opponents,
 where you would like to find clearer words when you are attacked personally, but I just don't do that.
 If you are insulted like that, then I would be like, you also put me to the right, but I just don't do that. If you are insulted or something like that, then I would say,
 you should also put me to the right, but I just don't do that.
 Because I think it's important in the business, you just have to stay cool.
 Good, but speaking of staying cool, let's get to the climate change.
 Are you a climate activist?
 I am a climate activist, so I pay a lot of attention to the environment.
 But we're talking about climate change.
 Do you believe in the climate change made by the people?
 I believe that the people have a certain share in climate change.
 But I believe that the share is so marginal that we in Germany will not save the climate.
 Because of this terror that has been exposed to the population.
 You can't drive a diesel anymore.
 Terror?
 You are not allowed to have lethal terror, of course.
 The German Environmental Aid, which always compl always complains about diesel driving bans.
 They don't drive through the main road anymore.
 All the diesels are stowing away in the side roads and pumping even more dirt into the air.
 They're passing laws.
 Laws that they're enforcing.
 That may be, but it doesn't mean that every law is useful.
 We don't think that's useful.
 We believe that even if the climate...
 You can argue about it. If the climate change is done by humans,
 then let's look at the percentages.
 That's open to you, isn't it?
 That's open to me.
 And then there's always the thesis that 97% of scientists worldwide confirm that.
 Yes, that's wrong. That's nonsense.
 If you look at the basis of the numbering, you'll find that there are several thousand North American and Canadian scientists.
 There are in absolute numbers larger groups of scientists who say, hey, there is nothing quite certain.
 And even if that were the case, I think, for example, in Brandenburg, I think it's wrong that we say we're getting out of the coal.
 We are letting 20,000 people into unemployment without a plan, so that Brandenburg contributes to the reduction of CO2 emissions by 0.02%.
 While the Americans, the Russians, all the Chinese who have left the agreement,
 produce more than 50% of the CO2 emissions.
 From which agreement?
 From the Paris Climate Protection Agreement.
 So the Americans have left so far?
 Yes, but the others are producing more. They're building coal, power plants.
 So it doesn't work.
 I think it's a hype.
 Also the whole Greta hype.
 And it's going to fly away at some point.
 Human-made climate change is a hype?
 No, human-made climate change is not a hype.
 The hysteria about it.
 While some Friday for Future school whips
 believe they satisfy their moral conscience,
 stand up for themselves,
 hug each other with their iPhone X,
 where there are somehow rare earths inside,
 which are being built in developing countries through child labour,
 but they behave insanely environmentally friendly.
 I think it's a lie.
 They have no point in protesting.
 You can protest for environmental protection and nature protection,
 I think that's totally reasonable.
 So I'm also totally for environmental protection, nature and animal protection.
 But I think that this whole CO2 debate is totally hysterical and quasi-religious.
 The Greta hype is always a cult of people.
 Is it a religious thing or something like a religion?
 I experience it like that.
 If some people from politics compare Greta with Jesus, I find it a bit strange.
 Who would you compare Greta to?
 I don't know, it's probably a girl who's trying to do it. She believes in this thing, that's okay, you can discuss it.
 And of course there's a crazy lobby behind it.
 If her parents publish this book, there's... You don't do events, there are 5,000 people, it has to be organized, it has to be paid.
 There are also these huge boxes and the loudspeaker system, they don't fall from the sky.
 They are all there and the stage too.
 There is a huge industry behind it that promotes that.
 So it's not as spontaneous as everyone else does.
 Whoever organized an event or concert himself knows that too.
 And depending on whether you believe in the human-made climate change or not, it happens.
 How do you want to deal with the consequences? What are you planning? What is your policy?
 So the climate is changing. We are not climate deniers either. That's nonsense.
 Denying that humans are making climate change.
 The climate is changing since there is the earth. And there were, by the way, if you look at all these climate numbers, there were incredibly hot phases, there were always and there were incredibly cold phases, there were also. Of course you have to deal with it. The question is for me as an environmental protection and reasonable environmental protection is quite different.
 Namely, the question is how do we save resources, what do we do with this planet?
 And there is a lot to be done. And you have to take that into account. That's not a question at all.
 You have to do that internationally, you can't just solve it nationally.
 But I think it also starts with everyone. We talk about nutrition, we talk about consumption, we all run to Ikea, well, not me, but we all run to Ikea or buy
 clothes that are actually still good, but it has to be something new. It also costs,
 I don't know what that's called, Primark or something, it only costs 4 euros, I can buy three, throw one away.
 I think it's about changing the mentality. We all want to have meat all the time.
 It has to be totally cheap, but complain about mass animal husbandry, about animal transport.
 We at the Brandenburg Social, as AFD, are committed to this.
 We want to ban cross-border animal transport.
 We want to slaughter regionally.
 You can still transport the meat.
 But we don't want the living animals to living animals anymore, because it's much more possible to protect the environment and animals than in the current debate about other issues.
 It's about how we deal with resources. Everyone needs a new cell phone every year, even though it still works. I think that's totally bad.
 We talk about changing the apartment every two years because we don't like it anymore, not because it's bad or the chair collapses.
 I think it's incredibly important to us to protect resources and then you have an effect in the crowd.
 But what is the task of the state? Do you want to become prime minister? What can Brandenburg do to fight climate change and the consequences of it?
 As far as climate change is concerned, Brandenburg could do little if you look at the effects.
 We could now close the brown coal mining in Lausitz.
 The students and the scientists all say best immediately.
 Yes, especially the students say that.
 The scientists for future are right.
 That may be, but we know that this is a lobby group.
 This is not a neutral association.
 This is exactly like the German Environmental Aid, who act as if they are a neutral association.
 Let's look at the money flows, who funds them? The Ministry.
 The Ministry doesn't want to put on the shoes and say that it doesn't mean that the government is banning driving.
 So the reason is that associations are pushing for it and they are complaining about it.
 That's not the case.
 Yes, that's the case.
 No, you'll see. There will be studies, of course, commissioned and the environmental aid can of course apply
 to participate in these studies.
 That's where the money flows, but there's no direct help.
 They always get it by accident, these studies.
 That's for sure.
 But what do you want to do now?
 Climate protection in Brandenburg?
 So again, it's not about climate protection at all, from our point of view.
 Because if we would do everything in the closure of coal-fired plants, in the stop of coal mining,
 then Brandenburg would contribute a size of 0.02 percent to climate protection emissions.
 That is completely wrong from our point of view and that is why we do not support 20,000 people plus to be unemployed, especially because there is no plan.
 We know for ourselves that fossil fuels are finally available. We don't want to plunder the country until nothing works anymore.
 But we need a plan for the people who live there first. I can't say, hey, I have an exit date, I'll send them all to unemployment first.
 Or take over some crazy ideas of the Greens who say, hey, we'll make a tourism area out of it, flood all the open and old
 wells and then 20,000 people will be bathers or something. That's stupid.
 What's your plan for the people?
 Our plan is, we'll first stand by the coal.
 But it will inevitably be over.
 That's completely right. And that's why we need a future plan and not a change of plans.
 What is the plan?
 The plan is, I have to create opportunities for industry to settle there and let other jobs arise.
 How do you want to do that?
 Do you want me to explain? We want to introduce a special economic zone.
 The Poles already do that with a lot of success in some regions.
 And we want to massively expand the infrastructure.
 That means it's about roads, but it's also about the Internet.
 No company is settling somewhere where you say, hey, I have a Holperstraße in front of the door and Internet doesn't work either.
 Does that have anything to do with climate protection?
 Yes, it does have something to do with it.
 Because only when I have a perspective for the people on site can I decide,
 if I want to, to get out of the brown coal.
 That's how a shoe comes out.
 And not when I say, hey, I'll make a date, set it up,
 then I'll chase people and their families into unemployment,
 who will all go away, and then I'll think about something.
 This government, the SPD, has been here with the government for 30 years.
 Hey, they could have done something.
 They also ruled in the ten years where Rot-Rot is ruling.
 They just didn't deliver.
 Because what they are now demanding, they could have done.
 They still had the majority.
 Why didn't they actually do it?
 I don't understand.
 My opinion on experts is that there are too few wind turbines in Brandenburg.
 Do you want to do something about that?
 No, we don't want to do anything about that, because regenerative energy in this form is not renewable.
 First of all, that's one aspect. The other aspect is ...
 Do you know that or do you believe that?
 I don't know that, because the numbers are very clear.
 That's one aspect. The other aspect is, by the way, I also think it's not ecological.
 There is the discussion about the land wind turbines in the forest. So hectares of trees are being cut down, a concrete foundation is being cast,
 and a bird and insect shredder machine is being set up.
 And that is particularly environmentally friendly.
 This is a total subsidized industry. We have the highest electricity prices in Central Europe.
 If you would pay the subsidies, this whole business will collapse with wind power.
 You have 80,000 jobs have been lost in recent years.
 But the renewable energy law is still there, you don't have it.
 Yes, but you have to drive down and down. That's a problem that scientists have shown.
 20,000 jobs in coal power are worth to everyone and the 80,000 in wind power were not that bad.
 Every person is worth something, that's not the question. It's not about the people, it's about whether it's profitable. We live in a market economy.
 The coal is no longer in production.
 Yes.
 It had to be's not the question. But it's also useless to close coal-fired plants.
 And then to do so, then you can no longer produce electricity from the few wind turbines.
 Last year we slipped past a fat blackout twice, according to statements from the Federal Network Agency.
 So, then I close it and then I run out of electricity.
 And then I do what? Then I buy dirty nuclear power somehow from the Czech Republic.
 So we don't think that's a plan.
 I think it's more about some of you reassuring your conscience with it. So it's that's a plan. I think it's more about some people calming down their conscience.
 It's not a real plan.
 So no new wind turbines, but the old ones can stay?
 Yes, they also went out at some point and now they are standing for the first time. Sure, you can do it.
 But still, we are against wind power in the previous form. We believe that it is not sustainable.
 I personally believe that the discussion is totally hardened.
 We are not even talking about new technologies.
 We are not talking about hydrogen stories.
 This whole discussion is always about wind power or coal, electric cars or diesel.
 I believe that we as Germans are no longer so innovative.
 In innovative, I wanted to say.
 Because we don't even think about what third or fourth possibilities there are.
 I think that other countries are doing better than we are. And this discussion is also being carried out with a lot of foam in the mouth.
 What about the solar panels? How much do you want to expand?
 So solar is an option, especially if you say you don't do it large-scale, but people can do that for themselves. It's absurd when you say they have an overproduction and have to pay money to feed it.
 Then it gets weird.
 We can't do it in a large scale.
 Other countries can do it. Israel for example.
 If you have large desert areas where no one lives.
 Germany is a very densely populated country.
 I think there will be few possibilities for a large-scale solar solution.
 Do you have a plan?
 Do you have a plan?
 Solar energy does not play a role in Brandenburg at the moment.
 But could it?
 That would be future-proof or not?
 But not in the large area.
 You don't have any unoccupied areas here where you say ...
 You can say that a solar cell comes to every roof of a Brandenburger.
 You mean by prescribing it legally?
 For example.
 I wouldn't do that.
 You could do it differently and say, if you do it on your own house, you pay the tax.
 Those are possibilities. I think that solar, also from the sunny days, if we look at the numbers in the evaluation and results, that is also not a bearable solution.
 I think we should look at what happens with hydrogen, what What about dual fluid reactors?
 I think that's interesting.
 People have to judge that in research, who can do that.
 But Germany is no longer a research country.
 We have 200 gender-gag professors in Germany, but not a single school for reactor research.
 Not to put nuclear power plants there, but simply to research.
 I think Germany has long been dependent on what other countries somehow give so should also make a head over it.
 Is Germany not sovereign? Why not?
 Of course Germany is a sovereign state. Without restrictions.
 I don't understand the question. We all have the restrictions through contracts,
 all European countries have them. And if you actually discuss sovereignty,
 then you actually have to ask the, and you could even say that sovereignty is increasingly restricted by EU regulations.
 That you look at how many parts of legislation that we have to implement actually take place in the EU parliament is democratically elected, but the majority of decisions come from the commission.
 And the commissioners are not democratically elected.
 And in fact it is so...
 They are democratically elected by the parliament. Or rather confirmed.
 Confirmed, not elected.
 But they can't confirm.
 Yes, but we know how it works in practice. And I think we already know that.
 Because there are always wealthy people who are put in politics.
 And I think you can say that parts of national sovereignty for all states in Europe are restricted by EU legislation.
 Would you leave the EU if you were in power in Germany?
 I think it's about reforming the EU.
 And that's what it says. The AfD is often
 connected with
 Dexit. They want to get out of the EU.
 That's not true. If we wanted that,
 we wouldn't have made a long
 demand catalogue.
 But that's one Euro.
 Not for every price. It's about
 saying, we made a long
 demand catalogue, what we want to
 reform in the EU. And if all of that doesn't work, you have to keep this option open to say, okay, people, it's not possible.
 Then we just go out.
 There was already a life without the EU in the previous form.
 So there was already a super economic cooperation.
 EWG was called EG at the time.
 European Economic Community, European Community.
 It worked well.
 It's definitely not about clearing the borders in Europe and falling back into the state of 100 years ago.
 That's not what it's about.
 It's about saying, okay, what's going on on the EU level?
 Do they see themselves in it too much?
 Is that good for us?
 What are they doing?
 Who actually pays for the whole circus?
 And we're very critical of that.
 That's right.
 What do you like about the eu in the
 previous form so I don't really like this bureaucratic apparatus so and all the other
 achievements that we have border freedom economic freedom in europe that is no
 achievements of the eu that there was a single agreement before this there was
 then relatively shortly after the war with the the European Economic Community. I don't connect that with the EU.
 I connect that with the idea, as Charles de Gaulle once said in France,
 a European fatherland. I like that.
 Let's talk about climate protection. Do you know the CO2 emissions of Brandenburg?
 No, I don't know. In tons.
 Yours? My personal? No.
 There should be about 9 tons per person in Germany.
 What do you do personally to reduce the CO2 emissions?
 Do I have to get rid of myself now?
 There is a movement that says the best form of climate protection is not to have children anymore.
 So that's a kind of suicide from fear of death.
 I find that relatively stupid, to be honest.
 Yes, but you can do a lot.
 You said yourself earlier, order less clothes from Asia or buy, consume less, fly less, drive less diesel and so on and so forth.
 What are you doing there?
 So I think we live very environmentally conscious.
 That starts with nutrition. It also has something to do with it.
 You are a vegetarian.
 I'm not a vegetarian.
 Vegan.
 It's always the same, so completely or not at all.
 It starts with that.
 But when you say environmentally conscious nutrition,
 then I think of vegetarians or vegans.
 That doesn't mean it. Then you think of it, but I don't necessarily.
 Then I think of consciously consuming meat,
 so not so mass-produced anymore.
 Then that you make sure that the meat comes from an ecological attitude.
 That it has grown on the farm, that you buy milk from home production, for example.
 All those things, how do I actually support the small sales on site and not these big chains?
 The stuff has to be transported. I don't need milk from Ireland or something.
 I don't need that. And these are the little things where it starts.
 It starts with the fact that my cell phone is about four years old, I think, and you don't believe it, I can still call.
 So there are many small steps that we also take personally. We don't know, we put up an insect field at home, we have a huge insect field that is not mowed for flowers and insects and things like that.
 We definitely do that. And if everyone does that, you can achieve a lot with it, I think. I just wanted to ask about agriculture
 politics from you, but if you don't believe in the human-made climate change,
 then you don't believe in the consequences for agriculture in the next 20, 30 years?
 So the consequences for agriculture are already due to climate change. We both fail
 at the word human-made. We fail at that. So you have to of course ... We are to blame for changing that.
 You have to see what you do with it when things like the big drought are such.
 Of course the farmer has to be helped. That's clear, they have to be able to keep up somehow.
 And I think home agriculture is important, especially so that we don't have to buy products
 that have long transport routes behind them, which are also totally unecological.
 In this respect, it is then already right that you say, all right, how does agriculture who have to buy a lot of land, who have long transport routes behind them, which are also totally unecological.
 In this respect, it is then already correct that one says, all right, how does agriculture itself adjust to it?
 I'm not a farmer or a farmer, I can't judge that professionally.
 But you probably have something in the election program.
 I mean, we have to have established the organic farming in terms of land until 2050.
 The conventional must have stopped, not only mass animal husbandry, but also land farming. What are you planning there?
 For us it is important that we strengthen home businesses in the structure.
 That we say we want to re-establish family agriculture.
 That's the opposite of what needs to be done.
 It is not at all, because these are businesses that are interested in
 to make their products regional through regional marketing chains.
 The demand for regional products is mostly
 organic products or products that are produced under better conditions. That's not the case with large chains.
 They don't care. If a Dutchman comes, we have that here in Brandenburg too, a Dutchman who
 builds a huge pig mast plant, he's just after mass. He doesn't have to sell quality.
 He supplies some chains, he doesn't matter to them. So we strengthen that.
 We are very intensively dealing with pesticides,
 that we say, all right, what has to be used in what amounts?
 Glyphosate is such a topic.
 In the USA they are already a step further,
 that they have clearly said that the stuff is cancer-inducing.
 We don't want to use that either.
 You can do a lot there and I think that will benefit everyone.
 Also the climate, as human-made change should always be.
 What do you have to deliver to make you believe in it?
 I believe in a lot of things.
 You mean, so that I believe in this human-made climate change?
 We're both not scientists enough to do that now.
 We both have different positions.
 We don't have to agree with each other at the end.
 It's not an opinion matter.
 But it's the truth, right?
 The scientific knowledge.
 Is that a synonym for truth for you?
 No.
 Good.
 Truth is subjective.
 That's right.
 Speaking of which, we have demographic problems in Germany, but also in Brandenburg.
 What do you want to do there? So, less for less children help more children, as far as I know.
 But it's also about emigration and so on.
 So we also have an emigration problem, we have a problem with the population.
 The population has just been published, the total population has increased.
 That's right. We still believe that the demographic problem is to be solved in the long term only by
 making it more family-friendly.
 That children, I said before, are not a risk of poverty.
 That people also want children, not only make children, but also raise children.
 And to strengthen families again.
 That family is actually something. I think family is great, I've already said that.
 That family is something where you want it.
 That it also promotes the state, I think that's very important.
 And we're also changing this problem of democracy.
 I don't think that if you import hundreds of thousands of young men now,
 that they solve this problem of democracy.
 But let's say you'll be a little older at some point,
 you're now 40, let's say in 20, 30 years you have to be cared for.
 Who do you want to be cared for here?
 So we have three and a half years, this is just as a personal experience, we have at home for three and a half years my mother cared for, who was severely dementia.
 The mass of care in Germany is still at home, not at home. You should never forget that.
 So I know very personally what I'm talking about. These are not read numbers or stories. And I also know how stressful or or exhausting it is. And I also know how little support you get from it.
 Why should you change that?
 I think it's about strengthening family associations.
 That you have to strengthen the care, is not a question at all.
 You want to become the prime minister.
 You can help state-wide.
 How do you want to help there?
 By drastically upgrading the care job, also in the payment of the caretakers.
 I find it strange, we live in a country, that bothers me politically
 basically, we live in a country, I don't mean only Brandenburg, I mean
 Germany actually, we live in a country where all jobs that have to do with money
 have, are paid much, much better than all jobs that have to do with people.
 If you are a caretaker or a kindergartener, you never earn as much money as a
 insurance person or like a banker. I think the basic mentality is bad.
 And it is important that more money flows into these areas.
 That is quite clear. The health insurance companies are also sitting on huge billions of overruns.
 And they should not only invest in huge glass palaces that they build,
 but in a reasonable care.
 That nursing staff, the people who do this job, who are really hard,
 that these people are paid reasonably.
 Because many, when you ask them, there are also surveys, they say, I really want to do this,
 but I just can't live from it. And then they don't do it.
 But how do you want to address this in concrete terms?
 By providing financial support, especially to caring relatives.
 We have already demanded this in the parliament, we said, hey, we want state care money.
 We want people to take care of their relatives at home, get good financial support from their families at home.
 So that it is at least made easier on the side, because the pension is not enough.
 My mother, for example, after 40 years of work and three children, got a pension of 584 euros.
 That didn't even reach the medicines at the end.
 So people need it too, and that's an issue.
 And they need financial support.
 Then you have to inspire people to go into such professions. to say, hey, it's nice to work with people.
 Whether it's in the care, yes, it's exhausting. Whether it's as a kindergarten supervisor or something, it's exhausting too.
 And I think that's the right course change, that you say, all right, then this whole thing is no longer, I'm also still thinking about demilitarization. Now it's like this, that for example,
 nurses are much more concerned with documentation.
 Three minutes brushing teeth, five minutes taking a nap.
 There's nothing human left.
 To get rid of that, that they are in a position,
 old people who are alone, they want to talk sometimes.
 Their biggest problem, they don't just have health problems,
 they are also lonely.
 And I think it's very important that we get rid of that, that we make it possible again,
 that more humanity is drawn in and that it's not just about monetary criteria, about money.
 That you say, of course, you can save something by spending ten minutes.
 That's completely the wrong direction and I find it inhumane.
 But if you are now a nurse, what do you wish for a German nurse?
 I wish for the first time, I hope that it will never come to that.
 But if it is, I hope that my family will take care of it.
 And the discussion with the nurses from abroad is no longer relevant.
 Because the nursing system, as it was
 tarnished by the government, would break down long ago,
 if we didn't have so many nurses from Eastern Europe. The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The government has been The The Romanian government called on the German government to stop hiring doctors.
 Because doctors are also needed in Romania.
 I think this is a pretty arrogant solution.
 To say, let them all come here.
 I mean, the people on site, there are also people living here in Romania.
 I think that's a typical German bigotry.
 To say, we are so great here and all these Romanians and Poles are allowed to work with us in the care,
 which I have no problem with at all. As I said, otherwise the care would have collapsed.
 But completely negating, completely losing sight that there are also people living there.
 They need a doctor in Romania, by the way, on the country.
 But that ends the discussion. No one looks there.
 We can't go through all the topics that are politically relevant, but young people are always interested in drug policy.
 What's yours?
 What's mine or what's ours?
 So our attitude, my personal attitude towards drug policy.
 What do you have to change?
 The question usually draws on the legalization of soft drugs.
 We as the AfD are against that.
 We don't believe that it is the goal to do this. If drugs are always drugs, alcohol is also a drug.
 So ultimately, abuse is what it is. But we have in the AfD
 purely formally for the program not yet found a conclusive opinion on it.
 But we are of course as a right- ruling party, we say the applicable laws, they are valid and binding and that's why we are against
 legalization of soft drugs. Has someone like you ever peed? No, I've never done that. I always thought
 peeing houses in the past is a bit ... Do the pees of the AfD meet? No, it's also called
 kif and not kif. But I have to laugh a lot because some people say that too,
 they always say peeing houses and then I have to grin. No, that some people say that too. They say,
 I think the government should be more involved.
 You can't just leave it to the private providers,
 because it's really worth it for a spatial digitization.
 It's not worth it for the companies everywhere.
 So there are similar proposals in Saxony, that one says, okay, what about, for example, with transmission masts,
 which the state finances, that the operators don't have the problem, that the operators are also obliged,
 that one says, so it's not just about creating a network cover and creating good quality, where it's worth it,
 but also there in the Prignitz or in the Uckermark, in regions where it's not worth it.
 Because I think that digitization is very important today.
 You're actually only talking about broadband expansion, right?
 Yes, of course.
 There are other consequences of digitization.
 Are we talking about digitization at the workplace or what do you mean?
 Yes, exactly.
 How do you make it clear to the Brandenburgenburg that many will lose their jobs because of digitalization?
 At the moment, not many will lose their jobs in Brandenburg. In the long term, that will be a topic, also in the federal government.
 It's about learning, it's about learning with others. That's very clear. It's about what is digital and what is not digital. People have to be taken with them.
 I think if you follow the principle, and that's my idea,
 if you follow the principle that the economy is there for the people and not the people for the economy,
 then you have to align yourself accordingly.
 Because if we are in a situation where we are fully digitized,
 you have a VW factory and there is only one man in it.
 The rest is digitized and automated.
 And he produces all the VWs. Who buys them? Who buys them if the mass of people no longer has money to buy them?
 Could that be for a conditional basic income?
 But we are not, because it has to be made somewhere.
 So this is not a perpetual mobile life where you say the money comes from nothing.
 So at the moment it comes from nothing when the Americans or the EU is printing money
 to stabilize the market. But that's another topic.
 But what is the solution then?
 If there is only one person on the line in the VW factory
 and the other ten can go home? What do you do with the ten?
 That's a question.
 Learn what you can do for the fields of activity.
 But that's what all other parties say too.
 What is your unique selling point?
 We don't have to have a unique selling point in all areas.
 That's not the question.
 And that's a challenge that is not completely foreseeable.
 It would be a lie if I said I have this total patent-solving recipe and am smarter than everyone else.
 We don't know, because we don't know what effects these refutes have.
 We know that it is likely to take place. That's right. And finally, I noticed that during the last election in Brandenburg there were a huge number of non-voters.
 You are probably trying to get that too.
 How do you try to convince non-voters and non-voters to go to the election?
 So in 2014 the AfD had the highest proportion of non-voters and the highest proportion of first and young voters.
 So in that respect we are already quite well positioned. But we make it clear to the people that we say
 democracy lives on participation. That is very important, otherwise it does not work. And if you don't vote,
 you are not allowed to complain. So whoever misses the opportunity to vote, should also
 keep it in their mouths and not get upset if their internet does not work or if they have other
 things to complain about.
 That's why voting is actually the most important thing to somehow shape it.
 It's not about voting for the AfD, it's not a election campaign for the AfD,
 it's about voting in general, otherwise democracy won't work. And then it gets dangerous.
 So it's better not to vote than to vote for SPD, CDU, left and green?
 It's generally good to vote. I think it doesn't matter what the people, it's the decision of the people.
 I take an oath to convince people, also in terms of content. I also fight for every vote.
 I think it's important that everyone goes to vote and what they vote, they decide themselves and that's good too.
 And last question, you want to become prime minister, with whom do you want to coalesce?
 The NPD probably won't come in.
 I wouldn't coalesce with the NPD either.
 But with whom then? The others don't want to go with you.
 I think at the moment it's still the case, I think the tone of the CDU will change.
 We see how panicky the CDU is at the federal level, to limit itself. It doesn't work anymore.
 There is already good cooperation on many municipal levels.
 We'll wait a while.
 I think the tone of the CDU will change.
 And the rest is decided by the voters
 here in Brandenburg on September 1st.
 What could your big project be?
 With the CDU?
 We don't know that far yet.
 Let's see how the elections go first.
 And let's see how the results are.
 And then we'll see.
 But it's already the case that it's only with the CDU elections.
 The others are no option.
 So not for us first of all.
 And I don't think we're an option for them either.
 Well, Andreas, thank you very much for your time.
 Ciao. Ciao! Thank you. Thank you.