 And then I examined the waters of the GDR.
 I had access to all environmental data.
 At that time, only very little was allowed.
 Because the environmental data was a state secret.
 But they were also sworn in not to report on the Dörfler.
 I have it in the documents.
 If a journalist reports about me, he is threatened with a term-free release.
 We wanted to shape, we wanted to develop the GDR into a democratic state that is set up ecologically and socially.
 Yes, and ecologically, that was my job. And then I decided to go for the river and fought for it for 25 years.
 So that the river Elbe is not built out of a canal to a waterway.
 And now it shows how right I was.
 I learned that in the GDR it was very difficult to change something.
 But I had to learn that in the Federal Republic it is almost impossible in some areas. The structures are so crumbled, so calcified,
 you keep going, you keep going. Now we have already reached the point that more and more people
 die because no antibiotics help anymore, because they are infected by such resistant bacteria,
 which mostly come from animal facilities are infected.
 So it's a completely sick system. It's a waste. It's different.
 So, a new episode of Young and Naive. Where are we?
 We are in Brambach near Dessau.
 This is where the world heritage site of Dessau-Werlitzer Gartenreich begins.
 And we are in the biosphere reserve of the Middle Elbe.
 Who are you?
 I am Ernst Bolldörfler, free ecologist, natural scientist, writer.
 Was that your life goal? Yes, at least at the age of 32 it was clear to me, after spending a few years in offices, in labs, in clean rooms, to lead my own life, a self-determined life.
 And then I thought, what are you doing? What do you know? And all I had left was writing.
 And then I started writing books. Back to nature.
 Do you write books all your life?
 Well, for 30 years. No, for 40 years. For 40 years, 13 books.
 Back to nature the first and Nestswärme, what we can learn from birds, the latest.
 Where are you from? Where did you grow up?
 I grew up very close here, 50 kilometers upstream, south of the city of Wittenberg.
 I did my bachelor's degree in Breetsch and learned machine engineering in Wittenberg. And then,
 by the way, my father always said, he was a farmer, he always said, he came from Böhmen, my boy will become a core farmer.
 But he didn't say what he was going to become.
 And then the boy thought, yes, sausage, I'm not a farmer, sausage.
 And then I read, chemistry brings prosperity, bread and beauty.
 I thought great, that's it.
 And then I studied chemistry in Magdeburg.
 That means you grew up in the GDR.
 Yes, exactly. Grew up and stayed. And I actually never wanted to flee, although a lot didn't fit me here.
 Why didn't you want to flee?
 Yes, because I belong here. I belong to this landscape, I am rooted here. I like the landscape. It offers me what I need, yes, free space, experiencing nature.
 Yes, it is also a very peaceful, a peaceful space here, yes, a creative space for me.
 Now you say you did your Abi. I know that from my parents.
 If they didn't have the right qualifications, they couldn't even get to the top.
 Why could you do your Abi?
 Yes, that was also such a hurdle to be taken. I didn't want to do a
 youth I didn't like that, this eternal same speech. But then the school principal came to my parents and said very willingly,
 if your son wants to do his high school and wants to study and he has the stuff, he is a good student,
 then it would be nice if he did a youth volunteer, otherwise he will build his own life path.
 And then I was very reluctant, my parents said to him, well, then do it. Although they didn't want to either. I was very reluctant,
 I did youth worship.
 You got some pocket money.
 That wasn't so common back then. But I got a book. A book,
 that was actually a guide for me, namely the Encyclopedia of Health. And I have that,
 we didn't have any books at home, for the bible and the hymn book.
 We didn't have anything in the books.
 Yes, exactly. Our life is playing out here outside.
 And I read this encyclopedia of health from the front to the back, from the back to the front.
 And it really shaped me for a lifetime.
 What was in it?
 Yes, how the human body is built, how it works, what is healthy, what makes you sick. That was important to me.
 Why didn't you study medicine after high school?
 Yes, because I can't see blood. I have a trauma.
 As a little boy, as a seven-year-old boy, I brought our horse Moritz from the stable across the yard into the garden.
 That was the order from my parents.
 My parents were still on the farm.
 And I did that too.
 Moritz was supposed to go to the herd.
 And then he was so happy.
 It was a sunny day.
 He laid down on his back and waved,
 as horses do, and patted.
 And then the horse hit me with the hoof iron here.
 Double underarm fracture. And yes and with all the consequences very bad.
 Blood and injury I have not really managed to cope with to this day. I could not make friends with it.
 But I tried after the first study in Magdeburg do a second study in Greifswald, namely medicine.
 I woke up then, but they didn't accept me because two courses of study didn't work.
 I already spent a lot of money, now I would have to bring a benefit to the public economy.
 We'll get to that in a moment. How was your youth? Were you in the FDJ? Did you have to be there?
 We, I'll say it now, we were all young pioneers and then in the higher classes also in the FDJ.
 I was even elected to be the chairman of the group council. That's a leading function.
 The teacher said that he was being serious. I was called that way at that time, especially serious, like my father.
 And well, I thought it was all so funny, so funny that I got laughter cramps during the call for a ride.
 And after a few weeks I was dismissed.
 You have to explain briefly to our young audience why that was so funny.
 Yes, so you had to get on the line first. We were just a small school, four classes.
 One class was only 11 students, the other was 14 students. So very pleasant, you have to say.
 And then you had to get on the line and at a place where report to the school principal that the class has been fully attended.
 At the end the flag was pulled up and a few words were said, which is what the week is about.
 It was always done on Monday. I just thought everything was ridiculous.
 I couldn't hold myself, I couldn't stop myself.
 That sounds a bit like our high school, I was in America in high school,
 there was also on Mondays the pledge of allegiance to the flag,
 United States of America.
 I find it funny on the outside, of course.
 Did I move anything in school, was it indoctrinated? Did you have that feeling?
 Well, I have to say, I didn't experience this cliché of a GDR school like that.
 It was a small school, a rural school, both until the 8th grade and then until the 12th grade.
 They were very tolerant teachers. You could also confess to Christian faith.
 You could also go to church.
 You were not disadvantaged.
 You could make jokes about Honecker.
 What kind of jokes?
 Honecker jokes.
 That would have gone too far.
 It's not that far.
 So there were jokes.
 They were also made.
 The jokes are blooming in the GDR. In the so the lyrical jokes are blooming in the dictatorship.
 But of course you make these jokes in the circle of friends and not publicly.
 We knew that of course. Yes, you knew the consequences.
 You knew that, yes?
 Yes, although nobody really knew the limits, how far you were actually allowed to go.
 That was the uncertainty factor, because the question is, was the GDR a right-wing state or not a right-wing state?
 We don't want to discuss that, but you didn't really know what consequences a certain behavior. And this insecurity, of course, also caused fear and let us be careful.
 What was so bad about the system at Honeckerwitz? You are probably asking
 a lot of viewers now. Because Merkel is always made funny here, there are no consequences either.
 Yes, that's right. Well, it was particularly bad.
 You were in your 50s in school?
 Exactly. So I graduated until 68. Then things were a little bit more relaxed.
 Did you get to know the 68 movement? Was there something like that in the GDR? No, I didn't notice it and I would also say that it didn't really exist in the GDR.
 You have to say that 1968 was the important year in German political history.
 That was the year I graduated and that was also the year I was in the hospital for several months for post-treatment of my accident.
 I didn't get to know what was going on there at the age of 18.
 Did you watch Western television?
 Yes, we only watched Western television. But you also have to know that television was no television for a long time. The first television in our village was given to my school friend with an enlargement screen.
 It was a very small television and it had an enlargement screen and then algae sat on it with water.
 I always went there and was allowed to watch a little bit, but we only had a TV set.
 Maybe when I was 13 or 14, so pretty late.
 And of course the most impressive thing was the advertising, the West advertising.
 Yes, yes, yes, it just stuck.
 The detergent advertising, the cigarette advertising.
 Why smoke HB? Why go into the air? Hb smoking.
 So such funny advertising highlights, because they have been repeated all the time, have hardly impressed us children.
 But since we couldn't buy hb and I was from the beginning, because I had just read the book Health, an active non-smoker.
 But the way of advertising, that impressed us very much.
 That's a bricklayer with a book.
 Yes, and that shook me, I have to say. I was only 11 years old then.
 Did you understand what that meant? Yes, yes, yes. And I was...
 I was shaken and so
 emotionally shaken
 that I
 didn't know what I had to do.
 What should I do now?
 Did your parents talk to you about it?
 No.
 No? No.
 At home, not much was talked about. No. No? No. Well, at home we didn't talk much and we didn't talk much about politics, but I of course
 noticed that my father was a very oppressive, very oppositional person.
 But of course he didn't want to burden his son or his children with it. But of course you could tell how he felt. And that was tolerable.
 Did you ever fall into the West, you could have done 88, 89.
 To let some air out of the cauldron, the ones who submitted travel applications or wanted to travel out for business reasons, they were allowed to travel.
 Then I was invited to dinner here and Hamburg. That was it. Back to your childhood and youth again. Now you are known for the best information about birds and insects.
 Did you have an interest in that back then? So you had chickens and spats on the farm. Did you have an interest in that?
 Yes, of course. So chickens, ducks and geese. Geese herding was my job as a little boy. I just had to do it.
 There was no discussion. You have the geese to goose and make sure that no gosling is lost, because otherwise there is no Christmas at all.
 Was our life's basis. Yes, we also had spats. Whenever chickens were fed,
 of course, the spats also came. But I didn't have a teacher, as is customary today.
 The ornithologists say today, if you ask them, yes, I was with my grandfather every Sunday back then.
 There was nothing like that. So we did perceive the birds, but the animals were in the foreground,
 because they secured our survival and of course the cultivation of grains, grapes, fruits and vegetables. Insects, yes, but they weren't in focus with me.
 They were just there, they took over the pollination performance, the apples were then fruited, the flowers, and then we harvested them every year.
 Then you did your bachelor's and then you entered the Erwig chemistry course.
 Yes, that was ...
 Did you pull through?
 Yes, yes, that was... You pulled through? Yes, of course. So if I decide on something, I don't do half the job, if I decide on something and it somehow gets through, I'll do it to the end.
 And I've been through these five years, almost five years. It was still the classical chemistry study before the university reform. And there we have analytical chemistry, inorganic, organic, technical chemistry, electrochemistry.
 So all round. I'm all rounder. But it was clear to me that life was hard.
 So there was no student life, I have to say that.
 So the chemists had it the hardest because they had to spend every free minute in the lab,
 besides lectures and seminars. So between 7 and 18 o'clock was the working day. And you were always in the lab and minute in the laboratory. So between 7 and 8 p.m. was the working day.
 And you were always in the lab and in between the lectures.
 Where was the university?
 In Magdeburg.
 Then I was also an assistant for four years at the university.
 But that was more like a plant-based technology, plant research.
 And then I was also promoted.
 I delivered a dissertation on hole-frustration corrosion of high-legated chrome and chrome nickel steels under the use of electrochemical and electron-optical methods.
 I also finished it, four years, four and a half years.
 You also have a doctorate in chemistry?
 Yes, exactly.
 Although you didn't like it that much. Rerum Naturalium, yes. Yes, I had the choice after the end of my studies, do you go to Leuna, Buna as a shift leader?
 What?
 Leuna and Buna, these are the chemistry combinations, the largest chemical companies in the GDR, they were already established in the 1930s, yes.
 GDR took over.
 Shift leader in the chemical industry, I was GDR took over. I was once a shift manager at the chemical company.
 You hardly got any air there.
 So I'm a fan of clean air.
 That's why I live here in the Rheindorf area and not in Halle.
 Yes, and
 then I was assistant for four years
 and then I became a rescue swimmer for a whole season from May to the end of August at the Baltic Sea.
 I said to myself, now it's enough with the laboratory, now I have to take a deep breath again.
 And of course you didn't understand that at all.
 Someone has acquired the doctorate and works there for a few hundred marks as a rescue worker.
 But for me it was a highlight in life.
 And how did it go on? Did you reorganize your life again?
 No, then I went to Berlin. Yes, because Berlin was urgently looking for workers.
 The GDR was then in the process of making the big leap towards microelectronics. And I was needed because I knew chemistry and material science and so on.
 And then I was hired in the work for television electronics.
 And that's where I produced the first chips of the DDR.
 So there were a lot of chemical processes.
 And there I had the women who worked there like the herrings on their laboratory table,
 to look over their shoulders and monitor.
 My colleagues who were still in the office were all chain smokers.
 It was terrible. You couldn't exist there.
 It's not like today that there was a smoking ban. Everyone was allowed to smoke.
 In the laboratory?
 No, not in the laboratory. That was a pure air laboratory.
 There were locks, you had to pull yourself out and so on. Clean room, yes.
 Space ship atmosphere, but no daylight. Nothing, no sun.
 But then there was still a office and that was for eight people, seven chain smokers.
 You could hardly look to the end of the room, because the day started with smoking and ended with smoking.
 Yes, and after a quarter of a year I had to go.
 And then I found a job, that was my dream, namely at the Institute for Water Protection in Berlin,
 Oberschöneweide. How did you get there? I don't know, I think I just applied.
 And they took me. I was really surprised. Because they needed a chemist.
 Yes, they needed a chemist and obviously had the impression after the interview that he can do something.
 And then I examined the waters of the GDR.
 I had access to all environmental data. That was actually only allowed to very few at that time.
 Because the environmental data was a state secret. No one was allowed to know how the air
 is created and how the water in the Elbe is created, how the rivers are polluted.
 Because ...
 That was embarrassing for the city.
 Yes, that was unworthy of the GDR. Because in socialism there was no right to pollute the environment.
 It only exists in capitalism and not in socialism.
 Did they talk about that?
 Of course. That was officially announced and you had to complain, even if the elbe or the mulberry or the sage stank to the sky.
 That was not allowed to be said and data on pollution was not allowed to be published.
 Then I first collected data, as a service order.
 I was also very happy, was a young colleague, flexible, usable, interested in all aspects.
 Yes, they have looked for such people, all the others were already highly specialized.
 They just wanted to examine their blue algae, their bacteria.
 But I was open.
 And then I had access to all environmental data.
 I was allowed to collect and evaluate and evaluate and
 present that was fantastic for me and so exciting because I suddenly got
 an insight into the most secret things of the GDR
 yes the problem was I knew a lot, I worked it all out nicely, without a computer, everything by hand and with a pocket calculator.
 That was the nitrate study. Nitrate is already a problem because of fertilization. It is a problem today, but it is much bigger than it was then.
 The pesticide study was a problem back then. It is still a problem today. Bigger than it was then.
 And heavy metal studies, poisonous heavy metals. I put all these things together and they were delivered in several studies.
 I was always taught that everything I know about data, no one is allowed to know everything I know about data.
 I wanted to know that. When you come home with your girlfriend or wife...
 No, I'm not allowed to talk about that. And I'm not allowed to talk about it with my colleagues either.
 I've had a lot of things in here and I've noticed how the pressure is rising. This traffic jam.
 Did you write down everything or did you keep something for yourself?
 Because you thought, okay, if I write it down now ...
 No, no, I did. I had to deliver reports, studies.
 But did you also have all that then ...
 Yes, the instructions came. The instruction came more or less overnight.
 It was then delivered from my director to the Ministry of the Environment.
 The idea was to have a Ministry of the Environment.
 Before the BRD?
 We had to check that out, but we had a Ministry of the Environment very early.
 Under Kohl there was a Ministry of the Environment in the mid-80s.
 After Chernobyl.
 Yes, in the 80s we already had a Ministry of the environment. Hans Reichelt was the minister of the environment.
 But when these studies ended up there and you looked into it, the emergency brake was pulled and the alarm was rung.
 Confidential closure. All data, all documents, all paper snippets to be delivered. We could have reacted like this. Ernst Paul, man, thank you for writing that down for us. We didn't even know how bad it was. We have to do something.
 Yes, so that would be the healthy human reaction. But there was a political opinion that said that we can only do environmental protection when we have enough money.
 That means we first need economic growth, then we have money and then we can do environmental protection.
 That was the strategy. So nothing was allowed to the public.
 I would have liked it that way. I had so much knowledge. I have the knowledge in my head.
 Nowadays there are whistleblowers and so on. Couldn't you leak it?
 Well, there was no internet, but somehow send a post to the mirrors in the west or something.
 I would have loved to do thatburg, because Berlin was too expensive.
 I had to pay 600 Mark rent as a sub-rent in a room and the institute could not afford it.
 And I couldn't afford it either, because I had so much money.
 That's why I continued to work in Magdeburg.
 No mirror journalist has ever gone astray after Magdeburg. No mirror journalist has ever gone to Magdeburg.
 It wasn't that easy.
 I know, and you couldn't call either.
 I didn't have a phone and the public telephone room was the waiting room at the same time.
 The post office was a living room, so to speak, where all the people listened.
 It didn't work, calling.
 But I tried West Contact.
 And that was in a very careful way. And that was postcard pre-pressures.
 Very welcome, Mr. or in English then Dear Mister.
 I ask for the transmission of your scientific work on the nitrate load or nitrate effects on humans and the environment.
 I did this regularly, especially in the direction of the West, the Federal Republic, but also America.
 And because I did this, I was under suspicion of working with the CIA.
 So I was checked for this. Of course, I didn't know that back then.
 But in retrospect, I read in the files that the demand for scientific publications alone led to the suspicion that one was dealing with Western secret services.
 But that doesn't mean that the Stasi has not observed you.
 Yes, they also observed me well. I have become noticeable since 1980.
 With what? Well, Stefan Heim was there, he was a writer, he
 did a lecture at the Mansfeld Castle in Südharz. There was the Evangelical Student Community,
 it is called Rüstzeit. There are 20, 30, 40, 50 students who meet there and then
 Stefan Heim was invited and that was of course the highest
 alarm level for the state security and of course they had their unofficial
 employees delegated to them and they also reported and I was already caught
 off guard by some questions I don't know anymore and then an
 act was already filed and the file got a name,
 such operational processes, Rüste. I was the operational process, Rüste. And from then on
 I just became, it got more and more intense, especially after I worked at this institute for five years
 and evaluated data collected and then I said,
 it's not going to go that way. I know so much and I don't move anything.
 Everything lands in the tank cabinet, everything is kept secret. What am I doing this for?
 I do this to change something, to relieve the environment,
 to live in a healthy environment. And then I thought, I'll go abroad.
 Do something reasonable there, Africa.
 It was not approved.
 I could have gone to the Soviet Union for a quarter of a year, but I didn't have to.
 Cuba?
 No, that was not a question.
 That was too obvious for me.
 Well, then I just said, now you will be free of charge.
 And then I told my department head, I want to stop by the end of the year.
 He couldn't understand it. Yes, why? What do you want to do? And yes, I will write a book about the environment. Well, naive? I mean, if you can't publish your scientific results as a scientist, how did you want to do it as an author?
 Yes, I couldn't bear this pressure any longer. To bear this knowledge and the mold. I had to get out of it. And then I thought to myself, write a book about nature.
 Nature is harmless at first.
 So these very bad environmental problems,
 you don't have to write about them first.
 And then I thought to myself,
 well,
 it would be a title
 Back to Nature?
 And that was a manuscript
 and then a publisher search and then
 lucky in the ddr a publisher found yes and this lector who really had an interest in it
 berns scheiber this lector said we urgently need an environmental book environmental education
 environmental education environmental knowledge and he also told that for ten years I have been looking for a car in the DDR.
 He does it. And everyone thanked him, from Rostock to Jena, Dresden, Berlin. No professor has explained himself to that. But I had nothing to lose.
 And now I have written the book together with my wife, back to nature, human and environment from an ecological point of view.
 Written. 15,000 first postage.
 Bestseller in the GDR.
 That was already sold before it was on the shelf.
 By pre-order.
 There were no pre-announcements.
 Yes, it was gone immediately.
 That means the state or Stasi didn't look in beforehand and tried to prevent it?
 Yes, tried everything.
 It took three years and three months between the release of the finished manuscript and its release.
 So long it was checked and rejected and revised and tricked.
 What did they want you to do? Did they always say, this has to be out, this has to be out?
 Yes, the Soviet Union is getting away too badly. I wrote about an Aswan dam.
 There were ecological problems in Egypt, the Soviets were friends in Egypt.
 Such critical things. Then it was also criticized that I write about the tropical rainforest,
 where I can't even know about. So, all these absurd things.
 But did you add them? Did you say, I'll leave the stowage dam or I'll write one stowage dam?
 Well, I discussed all this with the lecturer.
 He said, here and there you could reformulate a bit.
 And then he said, and then let's do something that is not usually done. We put the manuscript in the drawer and leave it in there.
 Now we make a new manuscript, which is enriched with Marx, Engels and then I re-enroll it. And that's how it was.
 Then it went through and then a permit came,
 a printing permit, which took forever.
 He says, so Lector, now we have a printing permit for this manuscript.
 Now we put it in the other drawer, open this first drawer and get the original manuscript out of it and put it in the printing house.
 That was possible in the GDR. A brave man, a brave lector, did it.
 Was he caught? We don't even know. We don't even know if it was even noticed. But the lecturer was very smart.
 He says, we have to export the book. The GDR needs currency, so West money.
 So also in the publishing house in Frankfurt-Main, in Vienna, they wanted to, they all bought.
 So they bought the book for 4 D-Mark and then sold it on the West Market for 20 D-Mark and then sold on the Westmarkt for 20 D-Mark.
 Just to get the point.
 That's not the case with books.
 With other things that were produced in the GDR and sold in the West.
 And that wasn't a small amount.
 Yes, that's how it was.
 And whether it was noticed is the question.
 But since it was published in the West. And let's say they noticed it, what should they have done?
 The books were out there. They were all sold out. And if they had opened a fast, that would have caused even more waves.
 But they could have punished you in retrospect and say, okay, you're not doing another book here anymore. For the rest of the GDR you're punished for that? Yes. I don't know what criteria they used. I don't know if they even noticed it.
 Maybe there were even bigger problems after it was published.
 They weren't even able to read the book. I don't know.
 Did they read it in the West? Did they get any feedback? Was it recognized?
 Yes, it was read in the West. I got an echo from the West a few months ago.
 A reader got the book in her hand. She said, that's still very up-to-date.
 But in the West it was of course not the runner, because in the West there were of course also other world books.
 And what was very important, the author, he remained secret. He was kept secret. Both in the East and in the West.
 The name was not on the book.
 The name was not on the book. But who is hiding behind it? There was never an interview, neither in the East nor in the West.
 No picture of you?
 No picture, nothing. The Eastern media were anyway, yes, they were also sworn in not to report on Dörfler.
 I have it in the documents, so if a journalist reports about me, he is threatened with a term of absence.
 And the Western media, I would have wished that some, I don't know, Contraste anything else, a medium, to me.
 It didn't work out for him.
 I don't know if they tried.
 I only know from one newspaper, the Weser Kurier from Bremen, who officially asked.
 They wanted to do an interview with the author of Zurück zur Natur.
 It was of course rejected.
 Everything was blocked.
 And that's why I'm an unknown person.
 When was the book published?
 1986.
 1986.
 Yes.
 What did you do four years later?
 I continued writing.
 More books?
 Yes, of course.
 Among other things children's books.
 It is also important to introduce children to nature.
 New living spaces.
 And then I became a politician.
 We'll get to that in a moment.
 Yes.
 But I remember the early 80s.
 We are celebrating, like Germany, 40 years of the Green Party. They founded it in 1980.
 An environmental movement was also ahead of it. Was there such a thing in the DDR?
 Yes, there was an environmental movement, but it was decentralized. So the networking was very difficult. And you had internet and no WhatsApp.
 Exactly. But there were, for example, in Magdeburg, in Halle, in Potsdam, in Berlin, there were the most diverse environmental groups, often under the roof of the church.
 But also in the cultural union. The cultural union, a state organization, has offered to found a society for nature and the environment.
 And then the people interested in nature and the environment gathered.
 One was monitored by the state and the other, well, somehow.
 What did you use it for or against? That was also different regionally. The Berliners had the advantage that the West media could always report about it.
 That was not the case in the Magdeburg Hall in the province.
 Yes, of course, the pollution in the Leuna-Buna area was an issue.
 Here, of course, the Elbe was a topic and also the traffic was a topic.
 I even organized public events. I was in and organized lectures.
 I wanted to organize a lecture on the pollution of the Elbe.
 We also had an institution that dealt with it.
 I asked for a speaker.
 We don't hold a reference to this topic. I also talked about air pollution and traffic and automotive and two-stroke engines and things like that.
 There were rarely any references. And if there were, they gave a very specialized lecture.
 And of course as unsuspecting as possible.
 Explain it to us very briefly. Where did the air pollution came from in the GDR. In certain regions of the GDR air pollution was very bad.
 Bitterfeld for example. When you drove through Bitterfeld by train, you had to close the windows in time.
 At that time you could always open and close the windows, but that doesn't work anymore today.
 But it was clear, Bitterfeld seam, close the windows back then, but that's not possible anymore today. But it was clear, bitter field sewing, closing windows, in the summer they were open.
 So it was an unbearable pollution with sulfur dioxide, with nitrogen dioxide, with dust, not only fine dust, also coarse dust and the eyes burned because the ashes flew into the eyes. So there were
 highly polluted areas, but there were also large areas that were very clean, for example Mecklenburg
 and Brandenburg and also here in the Middle Elbe. So here Zerbs for example is close by,
 that was right after the walls, the Bitterfelder children were examined and the Zerbs children.
 Zerbs was a rainforest area, Bitterfeld was highly polluted.
 Of course, it was found that there were also differences in health status.
 How did the environmental movement develop? Did you notice that there were greens in the West?
 Of course, I would have liked to have contact with the West Greens so much.
 It was not possible. How should you do it?
 Or with a West German environmental association.
 Yes, yes, well, I suffered a lot.
 Yes, under the lack of communication, under the exchange.
 And so I was more or less a single fighter.
 I then decided to get rid of this, of the Society for Nature and the Environment and also of the church
 and the environmental movement a little bit to appear as my own institution, completely
 undisputed, so to speak, as a. To appear with the appearance of the book.
 And your studies were also until the end of the GDR in the desk?
 Yes, never seen again.
 I don't even know where they are.
 They weren't published after the end?
 Not known to me.
 Published. Not don't know. So, the DDR, the Mauerfall in 1989, did you participate in that?
 So, were you on the street with Monday demos and stuff?
 In Magdeburg, there were demos regularly on the cathedral square with speeches.
 And there I had a remarkable experience.
 Then a journalist from the local newspaper Volksstimme came.
 And he said, Mr. Dörfler, you sent us a manuscript half a year ago.
 How expensive our bread is. Yes, we will publish it. So after so many people
 were visible on the street and showed that they were dissatisfied with very great
 creative solutions, they started again. So it was also hectic. It was really hectic,
 these demonstrations for me. And then it was dark with some, so we might have to report differently now,
 and that is truthfully. Did the fall of the wall come as a surprise to you? No, no, no, not at all, not at all.
 There are witnesses, there are still some. I was also with the environmentally committed writers.
 This is a child of the GDR. We have already met once a year in the 80s
 for several days, for three or four days, mostly in Brandenburg and have discussed there
 very openly about our environmental problems, about what we can do. And during these
 meetings I have already said clearly and clearly, people, it won't go on like this anymore. I don't know when, but it will collapse at some point.
 Not for financial reasons, I couldn't judge that, whether the GDR was a loser or not, I still can't judge that today. But this premonition of the population and this...
 There were many creative people in the GDR, smart people.
 And they just didn't come to terms with it.
 And I think that was the main problem.
 That we couldn't express the good ideas we had,
 couldn't discuss them, could not implement. So, did the wall fall? Do you remember what you did on November 9th?
 Yes, I know that I saw it on TV. I was not, I didn't live in Berlin,
 I lived here on the Elbe.
 Did you somehow cross the wall?
 Crossed.
 Or are you from been to West Berlin?
 Yes, of course.
 Have you ever received a greeting money?
 My biggest wish.
 I'll tell you what my biggest wishes were.
 I had two really big wishes in the West.
 First, books.
 For example, Erich Fromm's
 Have or Be.
 Books like that. So such books.
 And Tippex. My biggest wish was Tippex. No one knows what Tippex is.
 We used to write on a typewriter and with ten strokes.
 So always blue paper in between. There were 20 sheets of paper in between, you had to hit them hard. And when you had written it down at the last time, you had to start over.
 And with Tippex, that was a kind of dry paint, a white paint, you could leave the wrong letters.
 That was my big wish. So easy.
 So buy bookkeeping and Tippex. That was the big wish. So simple. So bookkeeping and buying tobacco, that was the first thing.
 Yes. So what the market in the West had to offer, that was quite sharp.
 So I'm not a consumer. I still live far and wide self-sufficient.
 So I survived the GDR. I didn't have an income for years. Yes, that's right.
 Yes, yes. So when I left my job at the end of 1982 and then there was no salary for many years, no wage.
 And then of course you had to survive. And my strategy was, how was it before? We didn't have any money either.
 We just built a farm. And that's how we survived.
 Crazy.
 But that remained important to me after the change.
 I wanted to stay free.
 After the change I could have started with some authority.
 But no, I told myself,
 in between I was still a politician,
 I want to be a free person, free to decide what I do, when.
 What is important to me, these are my topics.
 And you can't do that in an authority and you can't do that in a company.
 So, the Wall Street case. I think the Volkskammer has also resolved itself quite quickly.
 There were the first free elections and also the last free elections in the GDR.
 You had something to do with that.
 And you co-founded the Greens in the East.
 Exactly.
 How did you come up with the idea?
 Was it the dream, okay, now there are the Greens in the West, let's do some more?
 No, we were a separate Green party.
 A separate one?
 Yes, yes.
 We were GDR and already in November we got the GDR Green Party in Berlin.
 In the same November?
 Yes, yes.
 And that was clear to us, we have to be fast.
 There were of course forces, also in the environmental movement, who said no, we don't want to be a party.
 There was a party phobia. Of course, I actually had a party phobia too. I wanted to be a party. The party was just terrible, this party that prevailed here.
 But then it was clear to me, we now need a green party. And I was fully involved in the founding and then I also
 applied for the first free parliament elections, was also elected, but we thought
 we would get the majority in this first free-elected parliament. So I mean not only the
 Greens, but also the civil movement, so all the democratic movement, the women's movement, we were all together,
 who brought the change to the table, so that we have so much sympathy,
 that we have the majority and can then make the policy.
 We didn't intend to take over the Western system.
 The weaknesses of the Western system were known to us. Well, we were already a bit informed.
 There were also libraries, there was specialist literature, yes, you could get informed.
 I can imagine that the GDR regime was just talking about the weak sides of the West, right?
 Well, as far regarding the ecological problems,
 they weren't mentioned at all.
 So that you don't get into stupid thoughts
 and ask yourself, how is it here?
 No, no.
 This economic system,
 which is based on maximum exploitation of nature,
 that was us, I have to say us, I wasn't alone, I wasn't sustainable, I wasn't
 capable of the future and I still am not capable of the future.
 We are already in the abyss, yes, now we have to pull the emergency brake, yes, emergency,
 climate emergency.
 Yes.
 How was the election result then?
 Yes, the election result.
 Yes, we thought 50 percent%, but it was only 5%.
 5% have Bündnis 90 Die Grünen.
 That's what we called ourselves.
 In 1990, on March 18, the election took place.
 So exactly 30 years ago.
 Since then there has been this term Bündnis 90 Die Grünen.
 Then we were 20 members in a public chamber with 400 members. The overwhelming victory was won by who?
 Of course, the Bloc party, which used to be bravely for the SED, the CDU,
 because Helmut Kohl promised the blooming landscapes and that it would be better for the people.
 Yes, that was a democratic, demagogic election, I would say today. And of course everyone believed it and they also found this simple solution great.
 You don't have to do anything, they do it for us.
 So that was a huge disappointment for us, that we had so little approval.
 And then I was ...
 But you were a member of parliament.
 Yes, I was a member of parliament. Did you expect a member of parliament? Yes, I was.
 Did you expect to be in parliament for four years?
 Or was it clear right away that reunification was coming?
 No, there was no talk of reunification.
 Not at all.
 Not at the election?
 No, definitely not at such a pace as it was then completed. We wanted to shape, we wanted to develop the GDR into a democratic state that is set up ecologically and socially.
 Yes, and ecologically that was my job. And I was also the only one who operated the ecology in this faction.
 So everyone else dealt with democracy, with economy, with constitution and all sorts of things.
 You were the only green person among the green people.
 Exactly, yes. The only one who occupied the ecology department.
 And had two employees. They were great.
 I looked it up now. I kept talking a lot.
 I didn't know any more than Joachim Gauck in the Volkskammer, because the topic was simply important.
 And when you listen to it now, you have to be amazed, what did I talk about back then?
 So I wanted the energy transition back then. I wanted to promote renewable energies. And what was answered? I was laughed at. Because you can cover up at least 1% of the energy demand with renewable energies.
 And almost everyone agreed. So that's nonsense. Renewable energies. We need the healthy mix of coal, oil, nuclear and renewable energy. And there was no way to get there.
 It was an overwhelming majority that represented this opinion.
 Yes, energy transition.
 We already knew the three-prong effect back then.
 I brought it to the debate, but I hardly ever passed an application.
 So there were no major changes for an energy transition. There were also were no majority for an energy transition.
 There were also no majority for an agricultural transition.
 Because agriculture in the DDR was not environmentally friendly.
 And then I said to myself,
 we have to turn the agriculture of the DDR into ecological agriculture.
 Which also has work place effects.
 We have also seen, if we get the agriculture of the West, then there are farms that are dying and people are being left out in masses.
 That's how it came. 90% of the country population or those who worked in agriculture were left out within one or two years.
 I wanted the chemical agriculture to be converted into an ecological agriculture and chemistry to replace chemistry and energy with more human labor.
 Ecological agriculture requires two to three times more labor than high-intensity, chemical-intensive agriculture.
 It would be socially good and it would also good for the environment. I also did a study with a professor for future research,
 Professor Bechmann,
 about the work place effects.
 Especially for Brandenburg and for Saxony-Anhalt.
 And that was impressive, but it was politically not feasible,
 because the western system should be taken over one-to-one.
 Did you have an agreement? It was also discussed in parliament.
 Yes, I had a speech.
 You always have to tell.
 You said the agreement is actually an expropriation treaty and an expropriation treaty.
 Yes, so this agreement was not an equal agreement. I think it was actually an adoption.
 Because the ideas that we developed, which were future-proof and sustainable, were all thrown into the trash more or less. We even gave a vote in the environmental committee,
 even the other parties agreed,
 that the municipalities, the cities and communities
 were able to transfer their energy supply,
 namely their public property, to the city.
 Like in the West?
 Yes, city plants. You can earn money with that. But what happened politically?
 The entire power supply was sold to the four West German power companies.
 That means it was sold. They got 3 billion in return.
 That means a change of energy to energy saving and to renewable longer possible at that time. It was built with it.
 Who agreed to it? I mean, if it was the western energy companies, you had to agree to it in the east.
 Yes, so it was behind the back of the Volkskammer. I was sitting in the Volkskammer conference I get the newspaper, read through and read in the headline
 West German power plants buy GDR energy supply.
 So, and that was all already signed.
 There must be a seller who ...
 That was the then GDR government, the environment minister Steinberg was his name.
 We also talked to him, but it was just, he says, it can't get any worse.
 That's the best thing we can do. And of course, an energy policy has also been continued in the East, where a high energy consumption is rewarded by low prices.
 So this price structure is like this, the more I consume, the less a The concern was then gone. But why did you...
 There was no return.
 Tell me why you called it a disqualification and disqualification treaty.
 Did you agree to it in the end?
 No, no, our faction did not agree to the unification treaty and neither did I.
 Were you generally against the reunification was not at the top, we just wanted a new, a better GDR.
 We also wanted to cooperate with the Federal Republic of Germany, cooperation agreements at eye level.
 But this eye level was no longer available because we had got the entire legal foundations of the West overstepped.
 What was actually needed in the East was not taken over.
 So we have still achieved one thing adoption of the national park program.
 So five national parks, six biosphere reserves, so large protected areas.
 This protected area was also protected with it.
 That was a usurpation, was undemocratic.
 But today we are all happy that we did it back then.
 Today that would no longer be possible. Today we are all happy that we have these large protected areas in the east.
 And whoever looks for nature has to go to the east.
 You mean that was not a contribution, but rather a takeover?
 Can you also say annexation?
 You can say that.
 I know that it is not popular to say something like that, because it is also the case that a lot of money was put into it.
 So that's a solid contribution to this day.
 But the kind of takeover at this pace made this reunification so expensive.
 Because in the end the GDR was declared a piece of junk.
 Everything that worked well or badly in the GDR was declared, was declared junk and was sold.
 Yes.
 And we know that 5% of this
 property remained
 with owners in the east, the rest in the west or abroad.
 So what once belonged to the people
 was then gone. And that was for
 and that was for
 because it was declared junk.
 And the next step was then not, that was our suggestion, we wanted an ecological reconstruction.
 We wanted to convert the pollution industry into an ecologically compatible industry.
 Circular economy, waste-free production, everything was already there, but the purchase did not often follow a renovation, but a demolition.
 And that was of course a conjuction for the Western companies.
 The Federal Republic was also in crisis, in an economic crisis.
 And that was the conjuction injection, because it could be produced for the East. And I also experienced that. On July 1st,
 Day of the Union of Monetaries, I was still in Berlin, Volkskammer. I'm in the dark in the evening.
 I'm always in the dark, back in the dark. There were no free sessions there.
 In the dark I saw that everything was closed in front of the shopping malls. What's going on here?
 I looked through. All GDR products out, West products in.
 And of course the entire GDR production was forced to be put down.
 Although it is always said that it was all junk. But I don't think that's true in any case in general, because the GDR economy was in the Eastern Bloc the small West.
 The GDR economy was not everywhere crap.
 For example, the food industry, the milk we had, was worse than the Western milk.
 But with the currency union, the milk came from the West.
 With the reunification, the time in the Volkskammer was over.
 So you weren't a member for a long time, or were you then?
 That was your Bundestag election.
 I was then briefly in the Bundestag, because with the entry in October, there was no more GDR.
 There was also no longer the Volkskammer.
 There was also the Bundestag, but there were only West German members. That means that 30% of the members of the Volkskammer had to be elected from the ranks of the Volkskammer
 to represent the interests of East Germany in the Bundestag until the German general election, i.e. until the end of the year.
 And you were one of them.
 I was one of them, exactly. One of seven, I think.
 And then you were one of them? I was one of them, exactly. One of seven, I think.
 And you were in the Green Party?
 Hmm.
 Yes, I don't even know how that was regulated.
 I think we were a separate party.
 We were a separate party.
 Yes, and then I got to know the parliamentary life.
 How is it going in a Bundestag.
 That was still in the Wasserwerk.
 In Bonn.
 In Bonn, yes, exactly.
 Then I realized what it was about.
 Namely?
 To hurt the political opponent.
 Publicly.
 So it wasn't about content, it wasn't about the best way, but it was a kind of class struggle.
 And it was also a election struggle, you have to say that. And then it was about, yes, also to mislead the Greens. Yes, that was for me then also the ...
 I have already decided before
 that parliamentary life
 is not my life's happiness.
 Because, you have to know,
 to be a professional politician means sitting in the office
 and I am a person who likes to be in motion
 and is outside. But as a politician you rarely get out
 and rarely in motion,
 if only on the floor.
 The Greens didn't even get in.
 They flew out of the Bundestag.
 Exactly, I even experienced that.
 Petra Kelly withdrew when I was in Bonn.
 Yes, why did they fly out?
 Because they ...
 The poster, everyone talks about Germany.
 We're talking about the climate. No, about the weather. About about Germany. We talk about the climate.
 No, about the weather.
 Yes, about the weather. But you meant the climate.
 You just wanted a climate-friendly policy.
 But the time wasn't ripe for that.
 It was right. If we had started back then, then Germany would be a pioneer.
 Then we would probably be completely different.
 But that wasn not understood.
 Too bad.
 Did you go back to being a writer?
 Yes, so it was clear to me after I realized that my ideas of an ecological economy and society are politically not feasible,
 that I then continue to working in the public sphere.
 I continued what I had done before.
 And then I thought, yes, you can't talk to me everywhere,
 so I looked at the river, the Elbe. I knew the Rhine from Bonn.
 And then in 1992 I saw the federal road plan and saw the modernization of the Bundeswasserstraße Elbe.
 550 million.
 For a good reason, right?
 Yes, yes, yes.
 You could think so, yes.
 It was also claimed.
 But it was immediately clear to me that if we set up the same thing with this river as was done with the West German rivers,
 then we would lose something that is unique and unique.
 It is the last natural-near current in Germany.
 That's why it has become a large protected area.
 And it was also clear to me that the canalization of rivers increases the risk of high water.
 Back then we also had these high flood disasters in the Rhine.
 We know that if a river is pressed into a corset,
 then the subjects have higher risks to bear
 and nature of course breaks down when you channel a river.
 Then I decided to go for the river and fought for it for 25 years.
 So that the river Elbe wouldn't be channeled to a waterway.
 And now it shows how right I was.
 Did you manage it? Was the fight successful?
 We have the success, we can predict that the Elbe is still a
 free-flowing river, that the landscape is still preserved in the long run. But we also see
 that what has been done so far was exactly the wrong thing. Because you have continued to
 put waterways and traffic and freight traffic on the Elbe. And the problem is, however, that through these construction measures,
 this river continued to deepen and the river landscape
 dried up more and more and the river landscape, the Auenwälder,
 are in the dead.
 You have to say that now.
 Climate change and river deepening.
 These two factors lead to the fact that this landscape is now hanging on a drop.
 So and still the federal government still has the Federal Minister of Transport.
 I always had the Federal Minister of Transport as my opponent.
 It started with Günter Krause.
 Mecklenburg, right?
 Yes, yes, yes, pre-trial.
 And then it went on with Klimt, no one knows him anymore, Müntefering and Stolpe and Tiefensee, so many.
 I always had to deal with them because they have always been set up for traffic.
 Ship, that's good, but I say it's not possible.
 Elbe has too little water and climate change has less and less water.
 And now we have had the last high tide since 2013 and since then we have only low tide.
 And since then shipping can no longer take place economically.
 In the last two years you can almost run through.
 At the moment the Elbe has a depth of 1.5 meters.
 So you can't transport goods with large ships.
 But as before, the federal government still hasn't understood,
 still spending a lot of money on waterways and for the ports.
 Hundreds of millions of euros will be spent on ports and waterways,
 even though no ship can sail.
 Explain what's so bad about lowering a river.
 We have to make it a little lower so that there is more water.
 No, the river is getting deeper and deeper. There is no more water.
 The way the riverbed is beingened, the more the water level drops.
 Many probably didn't understand that.
 The river bed consists of sand, pure sand.
 And it's movable.
 And the more you sink it, the faster you sink the river through these structures.
 And the faster it gets, the deeper it gets.
 And the more the bed is deepened. And in the same way as the sole deepens,
 the water level also goes down. So the shipyard has nothing of it, but the landscape
 dries out. But at some point you never understood that the shipyard is not ... Unfortunately, the
 traffic control system is still not understood to this day. But someone has to suggest that and
 consider it meaningful. 25 years ago. But someone has to propose this deepening.
 So at some point someone has to consider it useful.
 Yes, there are certain interest groups.
 So, you know, construction industry, industrial and trade chambers and the farms
 and of course the waterways authorities.
 That's their job. They don't have any other job.
 But they have to know exactly that this is nonsense.
 I think they have slowly understood it, but they don't have any other job. They have to know exactly that this is nonsense.
 I think they have slowly understood it, but they don't say it. Because what else should they do?
 Yes, it's tragic. It's so tragic.
 You fought for 25 years.
 Yes, every person who is open, who listens and gets involved, understands that this is a rough
 It's so tragic. It's so tragic.
 You fought for 25 years.
 Yes, every person who is open, who listens and gets involved, understands that this is a rough
 It's so tragic. It's so tragic. It's so tragic.
 It's so tragic. It's so tragic. It's so tragic.
 It's so tragic.
 It's so tragic.
 You fought for 25 years.
 Yes, yes.
 Every person who is open, who listens and gets involved, understands that this is a rough The ones who have something to do. Yes, they have something to do. I learned that in the GDR it was very difficult to change something.
 But I learned that in the Federal Republic it is almost impossible in some areas.
 The structures are so crumbled, so chipped, you keep going, you keep going.
 I take it that the Minister of Transport also wants to keep going to keep calm.
 So you are also dissatisfied with our current Andreas Scheuer? I take it that the Minister of Transport wants to continue to have peace of mind.
 So you are also dissatisfied with our current Andreas Scheuer? Well, we don't talk about it.
 He doesn't do any other politics.
 The traffic policy is at the very back.
 It's at the very back when it comes to greenhouse gases.
 The problem child of traffic, we haven't achieved anything in the last 30 years, is reducing CO2 emissions.
 There is still infrastructure, there is still infrastructure. We need more money for infrastructure.
 Infrastructure usually means roads and highways. But I say we have, if you think about the future, we don't need
 more traffic. We need other traffic systems, services.
 We don't need more gray infrastructure. We need more green
 infrastructure. Unfortunately, that has not yet arrived in the
 Federal Government.
 We're going to make a short cut now. It's getting cold and dark and we're going in.
 So we sat down 10 meters into the warm and it's still uncut because we didn't
 have to talk further.
 Before we talk about your ecology and your ecological knowledge,
 very briefly, are you still a member of the Greens?
 Yes, still.
 I have never taken part and I would not have an alternative.
 There were many who took part in the first government participation
 because of the war operations and other reasons.
 But it was never like that for you?
 It was no reason for me to leave this party completely.
 Because for me it is important to have a political home
 and to feed my knowledge.
 Of course, I also offer my knowledge to other parties,
 because I am also active in an environmental association.
 Which one?
 BUND for the Environment and Natural Resources of Germany.
 But of course I notice that there is no interest in other parties.
 Not yet in the year 2020?
 Not yet.
 It's difficult. Even when I was still working for the Elbe,
 we had a dialogue in the boat, in the boat-hub,
 we always invited politicians to talk about ecology, rivers and traffic.
 But they didn't come.
 They don't accept invitations when they notice that they have a bad status.
 That they can't make it.
 Unfortunately it is like that with the people's parties.
 It's the same with the FDP.
 We can't get it. They don't come. They don't talk to us.
 Are you satisfied with the development of the Green Party?
 Yes, I am even very satisfied with the younger development.
 Because they have made ecology the main topic.
 That's my topic. That's it's very important to me.
 And I think they are also doing a good job.
 And they are gaining in terms of votes.
 I think you need them too.
 You need votes to change something politically,
 if you are in government responsibility.
 You can demand a lot from the opposition, but the government is a different category.
 The responsibility is a good keyword.
 Do you think that the necessary thing to do is, and that's a massive change that's ahead of us, that they can do it?
 I mean, they probably have to correlate with the CDU, which has changed exactly that in recent decades.
 Yes, it will be damn difficult. We also notice that now, when it comes to the climate issue, how difficult it is for the CDU to introduce, for example, a CO2 price. We use the atmosphere as an illegal waste container,
 in which anyone can trust their CO2 to the atmosphere for free.
 But that's not free.
 The real price, the Federal Environment Agency has its seat here in Dessau,
 has calculated that the real price would be 180 euros per ton of CO2.
 Now the federal government has decided on 10 euros and has been pressed to 25.
 But it is by far not where we should be.
 Sweden, by the way, also shows that it is different.
 They have already introduced a 91 CO2 price.
 With 25 euros they have now at 115 or 125 and that has an effect.
 If CO2 has a price, then the ways of production that produce a lot of CO2 will be unattractive, not lucrative.
 And that has to reflect in the price.
 And it doesn't. And that would of course be a very difficult thing to explain,
 that CO2, but also that biodiversity, so biodiversity, has a price and this price
 has to be included in the calculation. But there is a brilliant solution, I think.
 And the brilliant solution is to introduce a high CO2 price.
 It has to go up fast, so that something happens.
 With 10 and 25 euros there won't be much effect.
 Introduce a high one and then return these revenues directly, without deductions, give it back to every citizen.
 So that every citizen gets 100 euros per year for the higher electricity costs.
 And then it is worth saving electricity,
 because you can even earn money with saving electricity and energy.
 So that is a way, and of course you have to explain it.
 What is now going on in politics,
 Söder, for example, has now expressed himself like this,
 the energy prices should continue to drop.
 We have to lower electricity costs further.
 Completely wrong way.
 What costs nothing is worthless and is wasted yes we have to
 value energy and value food again and then these products must have the
 true honest fair price that is only one part of the solution I had last year with Ulrike Herrmann
 she said we can also not just or almost not on market solutions
 set and that is also a when you introduce CO2 prices, that's okay, we influence the market and hope that the market moves somewhere.
 But we probably have to change a lot of things.
 With policy, with laws, bans and so on and so forth.
 That's another category.
 Yes, it doesn't possible without prohibitions.
 Prohibition is something completely normal.
 A lot is forbidden, nobody asks me about that anymore.
 At Rot, Jodikreuz, whatever, smoking in a restaurant,
 I think it's a liberation that we don't smoke in a restaurant anymore.
 That's why I like going to a restaurant.
 There are of course also parties that are polemicizing against it.
 We don't want bans. No, we also need bans.
 But first of all, I think it's important to first convey environmental knowledge,
 i.e. education, so that people understand where we stand.
 We stand on the ground.
 We have to change radically.
 We have to tax the things that ruin our life's foundations.
 And the things that maintain our life's foundations have to become more cost-effective.
 If we carry out such a, realize them, then the bio-lives that are more expensive today than the chemical lives will reverse the relationship.
 And we have to get there. I say bio for everyone instead of poison for everyone.
 But it's hard to do, right?
 Yes, it's the biggest challenge of human history.
 You mean we have to convey knowledge and so on, but is that still a problem of knowledge?
 Do you think that in Germany most people still don't know what the clock has struck, ecologists?
 I don't think I'm really to me how serious the situation is.
 I think so, but knowledge is not enough.
 The next step is to develop awareness and act.
 And now there is always a dispute, who has to do politics or the individual has to do politics.
 I do not participate in this dispute, because we all have to, on all levels.
 Politics has to, the economy has to, society has to, every single one has to.
 And that's immediately and as energetically as possible.
 That's where the defensive reflexes come from.
 When you tell people, you have to, they understand at least, I have to, and then it's like, what, I, why?
 I'm doing it for. I live for. I show, and I then it's like, what, I, why? Yes, I'm doing it. I live before, I show, and that's a lot of fun for me,
 how I can live from year to year with less energy, with less resources, with less consumption,
 always better.
 You can live better with less consumption?
 Yes, of course.
 We live in a sick consumer rush, it started with the turn of the century and has been increased.
 Artificial needs that are carried into the population through advertising.
 So it's not more about what you anymore, but what we are told to buy.
 And the more we buy, the more we burden our natural livelihoods,
 the more greenhouse gases are exhausted in production, in transport and so on.
 The less I consume, the less money I need.
 I have more time. Time is also cost-effective.
 You can't really buy time.
 And if I also produce my own food, not everyone can, I know, but you can try it, then I know what I eat.
 And I also pledge to prepare the food myself, because this industrial processed food makes us sick. That's probably not so clear to us yet.
 Because of these many additives and too much sugar, too much fat and so on.
 Most of the diseases of civilization are what we can learn from the birds.
 Most of the diseases of civilization are nutritional and behavioral. So, if I move more, if I eat healthier, plant-based, eat less meat,
 I can do a lot for improving the climate and for the environment and for promoting biodiversity.
 Do you have political convictions? Do you have an ideology that you follow?
 I don't know if you can call it ideology. I have a conviction.
 I have a conviction. I know that we created the problems we are facing ourselves.
 We humans. And we are also the ones who can solve these problems if we want to, if we want to tackle them and start.
 I am a natural scientist.
 I don't think I am an ideologist.
 Of course, natural scientists and ecologists are very fond of the idea of ideology.
 No, no. I am strictly a natural scientist.
 For me, what is proven, what is proven is important.
 I don't act on beliefs, but on the best knowledge and knowledge,
 on natural scientific studies and knowledge.
 And then there is the question of who pays for the studies.
 There are 4,000 new studies worldwide every day.
 For example, I have now read a study, only the headline,
 you should drink five cups of coffee every day, that would be healthy.
 You have to ask, who paid for the study?
 I do that too. As a natural scientist I ask, who gave the money for this study?
 Monsanto, Bayer says glyphosate is completely harmless.
 Now a study from Austria, if you inject glyphosate, the rainworms put their work in.
 But rainworms are important, they create the fertility of the soil.
 So it's always the question, you have to be well informed, you can't believe everything that is said.
 So politically you are a socialist or rather conservative, can you classify yourself like that?
 Are you left-wing?
 It's quite difficult, because somewhere I am also conservative, because I want to preserve our life principles.
 If you want to, preserve the creation.
 I am also a socialist because I am for a fair distribution of wealth and resources.
 In Germany, 1% of the population owns a third of the private property.
 I don't think that's acceptable.
 I'm for more...
 ...division.
 Division, of course.
 The conservatives don't do that.
 I'm also liberal in some ways,
 although I don't want to be in the FDP.
 A bit capitalist?
 I'm more critical of capitalism.
 The capitalism we have today has brought us into trouble.
 Capitalism has led to the theft of natural resources,
 to overconsumption and ultimately also to the diseases,
 also to the mental diseases, up to burnout.
 That's a consequence of the pressure of performance, of speed, of speed of life.
 So this capitalism, this global capitalism as we experience it now, is absolutely not future-proof.
 There are some like Christian Lindner, some in the CDU,
 we also had them recently, they believe that with capitalism we can achieve this.
 The thing that has brought us all together will lead us out of this.
 Yes, I have to explain this in more detail.
 It has to be a completely different capitalism.
 I would be interested in what capitalism should be.
 If capitalism is aimed at making as much profit as possible at the expense of nature and man, because both are sick, then capitalism is not a solution, but the problem.
 You have just published a great book, called NESTWÄRME, about birds. How did you get to know about this?
 When do you study birds?
 Many people think I am an ornithologist.
 That would be my next question.
 No, I am not.
 Then you can't even express yourself.
 That's right. Many publishers have rejected the manuscript because it's not an ornithologist.
 Yes.
 But this book is not a bird book.
 You think it's a bird book, it's a political book.
 But you don't see that at first glance.
 But political books don't sell as well as bird books.
 That's why it's like that.
 So birds are important to me, of course.
 Messengers of nature.
 Birds show us how nature works.
 Birds show us how sustainable life works.
 So I looked at social, ecological, health aspects. And then I have to say, wow, we can learn a lot from birds.
 First, no violence.
 Birds don't turn to violence within their species.
 No physical injury, no bloodshed.
 Apart from a few exceptions, there are very extreme exceptions. The mammals, the males, fight until death.
 And humans have found war.
 Birds don't do that.
 Why not?
 They have other strategies, other solutions for conflicts.
 Even birds have conflicts, like us.
 Conflicts about the territory, about females.
 How do you solve that? Sing instead of fight.
 So a kind of competition singing and the better, stronger singer who has the greatest repertoire
 is recognized as the winner and the other one withdraws completely unharmed
 and has to be satisfied with a bad interview or with a bad girl.
 That's the strategy of the birds. Sing instead of fight. I think it's great.
 Let's dig in step by step. We can't talk about everything, and you should read this grandiose book.
 But tell us, how long have you been dealing with birds?
 Yes, already.
 Already during the GDR time or so?
 Yes, already during the GDR time.
 I have already closely followed at that time which bird species are threatened by extinction.
 Yes, at that time it was about seal eagles, fish eagles and so on.
 They were threatened.
 They were highly threatened by pesticides. Pesticides that were used in the West as well as in the East led to the birds laying eggs with too thin egg shells.
 The phenomenon of thin egg shells.
 And when they hatched, the eggs broke.
 There was no offspring for many years until this pesticide DDT was taken out of the way.
 Can you explain why the egg shells were thinner?
 That is not yet explained.
 The connection is there because you can, so to speak,
 with the birds where breeding success is zero because eggs are broken,
 they also have a high amount of pesticides in their feathers and in their bodies. So this connection is clear.
 But the mechanism, we don't know everything yet.
 And since this pesticide is no longer used, the eggs have the normal hard shell again.
 Has the eagle stock recovered?
 Yes, exactly. That's the happy thing. There is also something happy in nature.
 Sea eagles, fish eagles, they all only have it in the eastern part of Germany.
 In the west there were no fish eagles. Sea eagles only four breeding pairs,
 Schleswig-Holstein otherwise in the east.
 A lake flat with me.
 Yes, exactly.
 Other happy news?
 The crane goes wonderfully up. The stock wonderfully, it has been tenfold the amount of cranial systems.
 But overall the balance is tragic, because in the last 30 years since the change of the world we have lost half of the birds.
 If you count all the birds, there are only half as many as 30 years ago.
 How does that happen?
 Good question, clearly many causes.
 Main cause, intensive agriculture, maximization of yields.
 The yields were always going higher.
 We were happy, the prices remained stable or even fell.
 But the price was that the massive use of nitrogenous fungi and pesticides led to the disappearance of the baby food of the birds.
 So insect removal by 80% in the last 30 years.
 And so the birds breed, the young birds hatch, but the old birds find food for the chicks in the nest no longer sufficient.
 And they starve and come here and notice. We only notice that there are fewer and fewer birds from year to year.
 Especially the birds in the agricultural industry and the meadows, the birds and the field birds are dramatically in the back.
 So we have to talk about why the insects went back.
 Exactly, so if we want to protect birds, we don't have to protect insects.
 And that also has several causes.
 The main cause is again the agriculture.
 50% of the area is used for agriculture.
 Monocultures are being built, rapeseed, corn, grain, and insecticides are being used, so insect poisons, large-scale.
 Insects are killed with this, but herbicides are also used, herbicide like glyphosate.
 All herbs are destroyed with this, which normally grow and bloom.
 And insects now need flowers, and every. And insects need flowers now.
 And every insect needs special flowers.
 But if I inject all wild herbs,
 then the insects have no nectar, no pollen anymore,
 and then there is no offspring.
 They die.
 Either they get poisoned directly or they starve.
 We just found out that.
 We've known that for a long time. The nature conservationists are following this.
 The insect and bird hunters have been observing this for decades and are complaining about it.
 But it had no political relevance.
 Birds, insects. Two years ago, Steffi Lemke, who also lives here in Dessau, a member of the Federal House of Representatives, a speaker on the issue of nature protection,
 she then asked the Federal Government about how the development of birds is going.
 And then the Federal Government had to inquire, ask its own authorities, what do you know?
 Then you could answer the question. And the Federal Office for Natural Resources was able to answer.
 And the Federal Government has to give out this answer.
 The Federal Office for Natural Resources had the data, of course.
 And then there was the first hit, and the second hit was with the insects.
 80% fewer insects. And that went over all the media.
 And it was now slowly understood that our food safety depends on it.
 Because this insect death is now worldwide.
 Because these poisons that Bayer, Monsanto and BASF produce,
 they are sold and used worldwide.
 Insect removal is a global problem.
 And the insects are of are important for our food.
 Because most of our fruits, vegetables, oils, and other fruits need to be fertilized.
 So that fruits grow, like tomatoes, cucumbers, apples, pears, etc.
 And if the insects are gone, there will be no harvest anymore. And the less pollination, which has worked so far, free of charge, no one has taken care of it,
 but then there are the small insects.
 These small insects have such an effect that our food security is actually at risk.
 And of course, the poor will first suffer from it, because the prices are rising.
 The more food is reduced and the more expensive it gets, the less the poor will suffer first, because prices are rising. The way food prices are getting lower and lower, the poor can afford the least.
 And then there is the migration pressure.
 That's the connection.
 These small insects are the reason for this.
 A butterfly effect.
 In a different way.
 But a butterfly effect. In a different way.
 Let's say we don't do anything.
 We don't change anything great.
 We still do pesticides with agriculture and so on.
 Does that mean that we are at zero at some point?
 That all insects are gone at some point?
 Will that happen at some point?
 Or is there a... Well, there are sensitive species in birds and insects that have very special requirements.
 And there are generalists who can handle everything.
 In birds you know, for example, the fox on the field or the kibitz.
 They need very specific requirements. The roe deer needs weed in winter. That's how it lives.
 If no weeds grow, there's nothing to eat in winter.
 Roe deer die. And then there are also adaptable species,
 such as spudger, which is relatively adaptable.
 Ravens, also because they are intelligent and omnivores.
 Being smart and omnivore increases your chances of survival.
 Yes, but these are the few species that are so adaptable.
 And with insects it's the same.
 The big problem are of course the bees, the wild bees.
 The honeybees are not the problem.
 There are 550 wild bee species.
 Today the first wild bees flew in mid-January.
 The first bees are flying now.
 They came later in the spring.
 Completely out of rhythm. In January the insects don't fly. The first bees are flying now. They came later.
 Completely out of rhythm. In January the insects don't fly.
 They don't have anything to eat now. They consume energy but don't find anything.
 And if that disappears, then God have mercy on us.
 And I think that's something that needs to be controlled the fastest.
 That's why I demand a free agriculture.
 That's the most important thing to ensure our food security for the future.
 Who will stand against it?
 Well, there are very strong interests from the manufacturers.
 They probably want to produce in 10 or 20 years.
 If they don't do anything now and everything is gone in 10 years,
 then it doesn't matter if they still exist or not.
 Well, they want to produce what they have produced so far.
 And that ruins our life principles.
 The diversity of species goes back.
 But also their principles. In principle.
 They don't think so far.
 I don't think so.
 The boss of Monsanto said, Bayer took over Monsanto, I want to sell.
 Look, I don't care about the others.
 And the glyphosate, as I said, continues to run and everything is going on and companies are trying to prevent it from being banned.
 That it is being extended.
 Some have already tried to get out of Austria, for example.
 They already have 30% of the agricultural industry.
 And the agricultural industry is suffering from the poison use of the neighboring farmers who work with chemistry.
 How can you explain that politics is not acting?
 We have a minister of agriculture who says she wants to do everything.
 Well, you just have to look at how politics is advised there.
 So before you make decisions, you inform yourself.
 And the intensity of the consultations of the major corporations, chemical corporations, pharmaceutical corporations, car corporations, is of course enormous.
 We have ten times more lobbyists sitting around the Reichstag in Berlin than the members of the parliament.
 They get invitations all the time for food. Not from the Greeks, but a little better.
 And then of course we communicate with each other.
 And that's how opinions are made.
 I think that's the main reason.
 So with a healthy human mind, politics is not currently being run.
 But it is an interest-driven politics that takes into account the interests of large corporations first and foremost.
 Have you ever consulted anyone?
 I would like to consult anyone who wants to consult me. Have you ever been invited by an expert in the Bundestag?
 Yes, I was even invited to Brussels in the European Parliament.
 It was about high water.
 I gave a lecture on the subject of high water protection.
 Let's talk about birds.
 Do they have a benefit for us?
 Yes, the question is always, do they have a benefit for us?
 Yes, of course.
 Chickens and roasted chickens have an immediate benefit.
 But corn is not edible.
 And the spud also eats the chicken and the food.
 I'm shitting my head.
 Oh, that's bad. And the swans, they let something fall.
 That's why many people eliminate the swan nests in their houses.
 True.
 And the pigeons.
 I just thought of something. houses and the pigeons there is a lot of air you can explain to me why pigeon shit is so bad
 why it eats up the stone and so on that is just disgusting so birds are different from what
 they can no longer digest themselves and can no use. And especially bird droppings are very concentrated.
 Few ballast substances. Birds can't absorb a lot of ballast, of course, if they don't fly.
 And bird manure is considered the most toxic manure ever.
 The Romans already knew that. So it's practically concentrated fertilizer. The most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the most toxic, the that are in the city and they are shitting on the statues.
 And that really gets into it. Why?
 Well, you have to know that nitrates and phosphates are anions of anorganic acid.
 When rain falls on it, acid forms.
 I found it funny in your book
 that you write that zebra finches
 are interacting with the unborn chicks.
 The chicks that are still in the egg shell.
 First of all, how can they interact?
 And what do they interact with?
 You probably don't know that.
 We know that they are talking about it
 and we also know what they are talking about.
 How do you know that?
 Australian scientists have been doing this for years.
 So first of all, not only zebra fencing,
 but also chicken coop, for example.
 I experienced it myself.
 A few days before the hatching, they talk to each other.
 So the eggs are still complete, yes,
 but I've heard as a little boy already,
 when the hen has left the nest,
 it beeps.
 So they communicate with each other.
 Why?
 They get along on a common birthday.
 What?
 Yes, because they all want to be born on the same day.
 Why? Because chicken and birds are soil breeder.
 And to breed in nature on the ground is not harmless.
 Then the fox comes along.
 Because everything is for free.
 And that's why it's good to
 all hatch within a few hours
 and then leave the nest into the cover
 yes, a nursery is also filled with noise, so it's good to say the hen is gone
 the day after tomorrow and then he says that to everyone in their kitchen in the egg shell no no no no that says
 not the hen the kitchens communicate with each other they can also talk to each other yes yes they
 talk the kitchens talk to each other yes Yes, the chicks talk to each other.
 That's one thing.
 The other thing is that the parents also talk to the chicks.
 And that was discovered with the zebra cubs.
 Seven days before hatching, the bird parents report their chicks weather reports through the egg shell. When it's very hot, in Australia it's often hot, then it's sent to stay small and adjust your diet.
 Why? Because if you slip and eat small, you get better with high temperatures, because you can give off the heat better.
 The bigger an organism, the less heat you can give off and the worse the probability of survival.
 I think that's smart.
 So you can shake your growth?
 Yes, you can.
 How can the chicken do that?
 The chicken lives on the egg's father.
 It's connected to a mucous membrane and can then take more or less to themselves.
 Yes.
 Are there any other things we need to know about chickens in egg shells?
 We don't know most of it yet, I have to say.
 To get such things out, you have to research for many years.
 Yes, we know that birds communicate with each other. We know that they are very intelligent,
 but most of it is still a mystery for us.
 I remember, there is the famous example of the elster. It steals other eggs from birds.
 Can the elster then divide itself with the chicks into the egg shell? Or is that always just species among species?
 That is usually within the species.
 They speak a different language.
 Exactly, every bird species has its own language.
 Back to politics and agriculture.
 Pigs are also shredded or have been shredded for a long time.
 How did you feel about that? Especially male pigs.
 I think it's unbearable. As a child I experienced it like this.
 A gull sat on ten eggs and after three weeks the chicks hatched.
 After two or three days you could say, this is going to be a rooster because the comb grew faster than the rooster comb.
 We've seen that in the shadows.
 We've seen that, yes.
 And they were allowed to live on. They were allowed to live on.
 The hens were slaughtered and fed at some point.
 After a happy life, of course.
 They had a free run in the garden.
 And the hens were allowed to stay and lay eggs until the fourth life cycle. And that was simply abolished because there are now different breeds.
 You now have laying hen breeds, which are only allowed to lay eggs and are not intended for meat production.
 And then there are the hens that lay meat and are slaughtered after 30 days.
 After a month, after hatching, they are slaughtered.
 And of course they get daylight.
 They are told that they have a permanent day.
 That means they eat constantly, both the laying chickens and the mast chicks.
 Don't they have to sleep?
 They don't have to sleep.
 Sleep deprivation leads to death.
 But by pre-coupling a long day, they are needed or eat and eat and lay eggs.
 Every day one egg, sometimes even two a day.
 That's how far we've come with breeding.
 But this attitude is so natural again that the disease is increasing.
 The defense forces are increasing.
 The farther away you live, the worse it is with the defense forces. ordered and if then a chicken among the thousand, for example, gets an infection,
 all antibiotics are received and these antibiotics are then of course in the chicken, you can even
 prove it, yes, and we take chicken from this kind of animal care, we take
 antibiotics with us, which is all but good, because two thirds of the antibiotics are used for the animals,
 one third for the humans. They are the same.
 And this creates resistances.
 That means bacteria, pathogens, which are resistant to the antibiotics.
 Now we have already reached the point that more and more people are dying
 because no antibiotics help anymore, because they are infected by such resistant bacteria that mostly come from
 the animal facilities. So this is a completely sick system, it belongs to abolished.
 It's different. So I don't think there is any is not a discussion at all? This kind of attitude, no matter how we
 call it, yes, so the supernatural animal husbandry is abolished. You can also boycott
 as a consumer. I would never touch something like that, let alone eat it. Are you a vegan or vegetarian?
 So I eat it very naturally. I grew up on the farm, there were two pigs every year for the whole year, and then chickens and ducks.
 In the meantime I have moved away from meat consumption.
 What I still eat is fish once a week. Somehow I need that, I think, for my health.
 Maybe I'll say goodbye to it too, at some point.
 I can't say yet. Otherwise I eat plants, for example, I ate kohlrabi vegetables today.
 Yes, from the garden. There was no winter, everything is still there.
 There are also turbinambu, I also had a lot of it. Tobinambur is a great fruit.
 You don't have to worry about anything.
 If you have it in the garden, you only need to harvest it.
 It's frosty. You can harvest it every year.
 Tobinambur?
 Tobinambur, the Indian potato.
 I've never heard of it.
 No?
 No.
 The Indians look like potatoes.
 They grow up to 3 meters high, but they grow into sunflower seeds.
 Oh.
 Yes.
 I could have brought them with me if I knew.
 I'll bring my parents with me.
 Yes.
 He has an eye garden.
 Yes.
 Yes, he'll come with me.
 I know you know that.
 He knows.
 How long did you write the book?
 Yes, it's always quite difficult to say.
 It's a lifelong knowledge, but I've been working on it for two years.
 Did you learn anything about birds, insects, that you didn't know before?
 Oh yes, a lot. I've become much smarter, also for myself.
 The special thing about the book is that I always draw a line from the birds to the people.
 What can we learn from the birds?
 As far as health and healthy life are concerned, I have learned a lot from the birds.
 For example?
 For example, interval fasting.
 For interval fasting, for the birds it is completely normal.
 In nature, sometimes you have an excess of food, sometimes a shortage.
 Our ancestors lived like that too. They had to live like that. It didn't work any other way.
 And these are natural rhythms that still exist in us.
 But we have had a permanent excess for decades. And that makes us sick.
 My mother always told me, when I was a little boy, that I was always busy eating.
 And I was afraid of the hunger.
 And I learned that you don't have to be afraid of the hunger.
 It doesn't kill us if we experience the feeling of hunger voluntarily, self-determined.
 And this interval fasting, so just eating nothing for 16 hours, something wonderful happens.
 So, this hunger feeling is exhausted, Then a recycling happens in the organism, namely cell waste.
 We have cell division, where excretion is produced. This cell waste is normally stored in the body, stored in the body,
 but it leads to inflammation and weakening of the immune system.
 And this waste is called autophagy by recycling.
 So that one and the other is dead.
 So if I eat breakfast at 7 in the morning, it would be smart to wait 16 hours and eat something at 23.
 Is that the logic?
 Everyone has to find their own rhythm.
 But you talked about 16 hours.
 16 hours. For me it's like that, in the evening at 6 p.m.
 At the bottom nothing more. And then the next day, in the late morning,
 and that's when I feel the lightest.
 Just moving in the morning instead of thinking about eating.
 When you get a hunger feeling, movement helps. Then you forget about food. When you get a feeling of hunger, movement helps.
 Then you forget about hunger.
 And the second thing is that telomerase is activated.
 That is the young-bond enzyme.
 Birds have a particularly active telomerase.
 And you don't even notice how old the birds are.
 I think that's great.
 Externally and internally.
 They don't have these complaints that we have with increasing age.
 So, movement restrictions, osteoporosis, dementia, hearing and vision disabilities, they don't have all of that.
 You have to explain why not.
 Yes, that simply has to do with your lifestyle. You still have a very natural lifestyle that corresponds to natural rhythms.
 So a lot of movement outside, fresh air, daylight, natural nutrition, a lot, a little, sufficient sleep.
 And that includes the day-night rhythm, the summer-winter rhythm.
 In winter you sleep more than in summer, the birds are still keeping up with it.
 Our ancestors also kept up with it.
 And that increases the defense forces and that also increases the activity of this young bone enzyme.
 And so you can not only circumvent age disorders, but you can also rejuvenate yourself, internally as well as externally.
 And I am very grateful to the Nobel Prize winner Elizabeth Blackburn,
 I mentioned her in my book,
 she was the one who did it, she won the Nobel Prize for it.
 We have forgotten all of that.
 We live so far away from nature, so alien to nature,
 in every relationship,
 that we simply live sickly.
 We live sickly.
 It would be obviously easy to live sick. Live sick. It would be easy to change that.
 Yes, of course.
 You just have to know it.
 You just have to want it.
 I do it.
 And I have to say,
 it gives me great pleasure.
 I hope someone will take it away from you.
 Now that it has stopped.
 Are there other things you have learned?
 Yes. Couple relationships. And, now it's stopped, are there any other things you've learned?
 Yes, couple relationships. Male-female relationship, male-female relationship.
 I've also learned that there are even same-sex birds.
 Yes, there are.
 For example, geese.
 Gays.
 Or ducks.
 For example, two female ducks join together
 in a life community
 and then laugh at an heron
 who is breastfeeding them.
 There are enough heron,
 there are enough heron who are willing to breastfeed.
 And then they build a nest together.
 The two ducks lay their eggs in the nest, just twice as many, and then they breed alternately and take care of their young together.
 That's what happens, for example, with ducks.
 And two male geese.
 Yes, with geese, you know, there are also male friendships.
 Yes, so they live, so to speak, in true duality, but in the spring they of course fulfill their biological obligations.
 They look for a goose, together, fertilize this goose and when the breeding is over, they live together again.
 But that's really exceptions. Exceptions. I find the male-female relationship interesting, because I think this relationship is very fair.
 Females have the right to vote, males do not have the right to vote.
 But males are candidates for the election. They can present themselves, they can present themselves, they can show themselves on the most beautiful sides, but who comes together with whom, that's what the females decide.
 But the males look for whom they try to mate, right?
 That's right.
 Or do they go to the market and look at ten different females?
 No, no, the males actually circumscribe every female.
 The male is actually quite irrelevant.
 Really?
 Yes, yes.
 So important is, they just want females.
 Yes, possibly even several.
 Does the female have criteria for how the male bird must look like?
 Exactly.
 Above all, he must have a well-groomed feather-clad.
 So if he is ungroomed, he will fall through.
 And the bird must be colorfully brilliant.
 So the most brilliant red-haired males are the most coveted.
 Why? Because the outer outfit of the bird is a mirror image of the inner values, of inner fitness. That's not the case with us. We can dress up and there can be a halunke inside.
 And that simply also has to do with the food base.
 A well-fed male, which has a rich food spectrum, also takes absorbs all the necessary substances, including the colouring components.
 That's why birds like to eat coloured fruits.
 We are also recommended to eat the coloured fruits,
 because there are many antioxidants,
 so cancer-relieving substances, in them.
 And these colouring components also store in the feathers.
 So a bird that is healthy
 is fed it shows it with its colorful feathers the female is about having healthy males
 to have a good father for the young people there is another couple behavior what we can take as an example
 or what you find interesting well there is also the polygamy in some bird species.
 Polygamy is once called polygyny, that is, one male, several females, and polyandry, then the other way around.
 But more often it is one male, several females.
 It is not recommended, but there is a culture.
 In Tibet, for example, one woman, two men.
 One man is on the road with the yakeras for days and weeks,
 and the other is with the woman, and then they change.
 I know that from America. I had friends who were Mormons.
 The man is allowed to have several women.
 But it's forbidden in Germany, so I don't want to proclaim that here.
 And another social behavior that you were surprised by Föge?
 Where do you start there? Social behavior, of course.
 You don't have to tell everything.
 An example, yes. For example, the geese are seen as greedy. Do you want to tell everything? No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, And I came to the conclusion that geese are not greedy. But who is greedy?
 Greedy is the human being.
 And that is the problem.
 And that is the challenge for us.
 This greed, which is also in our genes, partly.
 Really?
 Yes, it's not an excuse now.
 Yes, yes.
 To control, to regulate them, so that they do not come to such injustices as we have in our country and on our earth.
 So birds take what they need, nothing else.
 I like that. To take what you need.
 Finding the healthy measure. We can learn that from the birds.
 Have we lost any birds in Germany in recent years?
 Yes, a lot.
 Are they extinct? Do you say they are extinct?
 They are extinct. For example the geese.
 There are no geese in Germany anymore?
 They are trying to re-settlement, at least in Switzerland and Austria.
 They died because their living conditions were no longer good.
 Geese need food, dead animals.
 In the past, a sheep died in the pasture, and it stayed there.
 But the hygiene regulations no longer allow it.
 And that's why the geese don't have a food base anymore.
 We have more and more wolves in the country.
 From time to time they also tear up a sheep.
 You're tearing them up.
 Yes, but sometimes something stays on.
 Yes, that's right. But the geese are no longer there.
 The geese don't know that yet.
 I have to tell someone.
 Yes, that's right.
 A few questions that have been asked.
 Wind turbines.
 Are you actually an opponent of wind turbines now?
 Because they are supposedly very, very dangerous for birds.
 I am a friend of wind turbines.
 Because only with that we can cover our reduced need for electricity.
 We have to reduce electricity,
 reduce strategies,
 but it's not possible without electricity.
 And that's what wind and sun are for,
 the ideal sources.
 Is the wind turbine the biggest enemy of birds?
 You have to know where wind turbines should be
 and where not.
 Wind turbines shouldn't be in the bird protection area.
 And that's also kept in mind.
 But in open landscapes, So wind turbines shouldn't be in the bird protection area. And that is also kept in mind.
 But wind turbines belong in open landscapes.
 And I think that's exaggerated.
 It's true that certain bird species, the red milan for example,
 before a flight over the Elbe, the Red Mille is threatened by a storm worldwide.
 There are still many hundreds in Germany.
 It likes to come. It catches the mouse down there, because where the wind turbines are, there is no poison.
 There are still mice. There are no more on the farm.
 Then the mouse grabs it and climbs up and then comes into the wind turbine and that's it.
 That's a problem. That's right. And it's also a problem for the mouse and then it climbs up and then comes into the windmill and then that's it. That's a problem, that's right, and it's also a problem for mouse buzzards. And there are now also
 solutions, because with the help of technology you can see through a software whether a
 red milan is approaching and then the windwheel can be driven down and thus the red milan is protected.
 So that's hopeful, but
 to call the windwheels shredder machines for the birds
 I don't think that's appropriate.
 Are birds just too stupid to see that something is moving?
 Well, you have to imagine it like this.
 They grab the mouse and then climb up.
 So they don't just fly straight in?
 No, that doesn't happen.
 They also fly around that.
 I know that from Spain.
 There is also a wind turbine, they fly around it.
 No, they're not stupid.
 But are there bigger enemies than wind turbines for birds?
 Volker Quaschning recently mentioned cats, cars.
 Yes, of course.
 If you look at the cause and effect statistics,
 it's in the book, How many birds pass through Germany?
 How many wind turbines pass through?
 Tell me, I think many people need to know that.
 Yes, yes, it's in the scale.
 I think 200,000 should now be around, 200,000 pass through wind turbines.
 But 10 to 20 million are caused by car traffic, train traffic, cats and glass windows.
 Blows on glass windows.
 So there are really 10 to 100 times more caused by other causes.
 Some wind turbines are very overpowering, if they are only available.
 Yes, I try to understand it. You don't want your field of view to be disturbed by wind turbines.
 Some people feel sick because of wind turbines.
 I can't say if this is realistic.
 The subject of infrasound is also a highly played topic, but we have infrasound everywhere.
 When trees are rustling, we have infrasound. Elephants understand each other through infrasound.
 It's actually something natural. I don't know if it has to make you very sick.
 Like I said, I don't know.
 So wind is not the big problem?
 No, the main problem, the main problem is agriculture.
 We don't have that. There are no numbers.
 Because the dead chickens don't count.
 Ah, of course.
 The dead birds that lie on the roadside or on the railing, they count.
 But the unborn chickens, who starve because there are no insects left.
 Or the shredded chicks.
 Yes, that's true. But they are not the free-living birds.
 Do you mean shredded by wind or by us?
 No, by us. They are a different class of birds.
 What I wanted to know, about climate change.
 Does climate change have an effect on
 the train birds? Yes, enormous effect. So they have to fly further? Yes, the long-distance
 birds. There are stand birds, they are like this here in the summer, for example house spats,
 clover and so on, weak ones. Then there are short-distance And of course they have to survive longer distances, thirst distances, hunger distances, through the spread of the desert.
 And the failures are of course enormous.
 Only every second bird of prey comes back.
 And this quota is getting worse and worse, and especially the long-distance hunters are coming back more and more.
 The rest dies or just stays in paradise?
 What rest do you mean?
 You mean every second one returns?
 Yes, and the others come around.
 They come around, yes.
 This is not a pleasure journey, this bird trip.
 If we make a long trip, we expect to return.
 With birds, it's like that, that only the second one can expect to return.
 But has the climate change worsened the situation? Can you explain that briefly?
 So the desert has spread, that's why they have to fly longer. Exactly, that's one thing.
 The other is of course that climate change is coming at a pace that has never been in
 the history of development. So I have a representation from the last ice age,
 the last 10,000 years. I'm also at Scientists for Future and that's where I have a picture from the last ice age, the last 10,000 years.
 I am also at Scientists for Future and from there I have these graphics.
 There you can see that the climate has always fluctuated.
 In the last 10,000 years.
 And in the last decade it has risen by one degree.
 And there will definitely be another degree.
 And that's vertical. And this speed, this speed is...
 The biological system is not adapted to the living beings.
 They don't have the time to adapt to the new conditions.
 Finally, there are... You are an expert, you deal with it a lot, there are many people who listen and say, oh, that interests me, but I'm a layman, I can't even somehow, the spats of a red Milan, how they express themselves, the fips. I can't really tell. Are there any warning signs in nature that everyone can recognize right away?
 Where you can say, okay, this is a bad time.
 Warning signs? You don't have to be able to tell all the bird species.
 It's nice if you can, but what do you mean by warning signs?
 you can do it but but what do you mean with warning signals nobody tells us how many bees can fly around in the garden or how many birds suddenly sit in the tree or so on
 or do we always have to look directly at it and really try or there are really obvious
 warning signals in nature that you can. Where you say, that's obvious, that there is a problem.
 There are probably many who are watching now,
 where the grandmother and mother said,
 I don't watch the two-hour interview,
 tell me what I need to know about it.
 Yes, you have to know what the needs? Our needs as humans are food, water, protection, partner, reproduction.
 These are our needs. These are also the needs of the birds.
 And now you have to know what food needs you have.
 Or water. On hot days birds suffer thirst. When the landscape is dry, in the garden there is no water either days, birds suffer thirst.
 When the landscape is dry, in the garden there is no water, then they suffer thirst.
 And there everyone can put a bowl of water and then you can enjoy how the birds drink and bathe.
 Very simple solution.
 Or food. Many birds need insects, others need weeds or fruits.
 If you have a garden, you should always take care of as little as possible of short-short grass.
 Short-short grass is an eco-wasteland, nothing lives there, nothing blooms there.
 As many blooming, fruit-bearing shrubs, herbs, leaves in the garden.
 Allow disorder.
 Not too much order.
 The order ensures that...
 Order is a warning signal.
 Exactly.
 So leaves in the garden.
 Leave branches.
 Laying up.
 How do you say it?
 Laying down 30 or stones. create as much disorder as possible.
 So disorder in our sense, that's the natural order. Nature doesn't make everything plan and short.
 And if you create such a living space, you don't have to worry about the birds anymore.
 I'm just wondering, what did you have to do back then? Always mow the lawn? Why did we always mow the lawn?
 I don't know, I don't do it.
 And only where I go and then with the hay.
 But it's a fashion.
 Because it's made by the neighbor.
 Because everyone does it like that.
 It looks nice. But it's monoton's fault. Because everyone does it that way. It looks nice. It looks neat.
 Yes, but it's monotonous. There's nothing alive there.
 As a child, I don't want to grow up in a garden where there's only short-shorted grass and maybe a coniferous tree.
 I can't experience nature there.
 The wild garden, that's the trend.
 Are there any plants that we should have in the garden that most people don't have in the garden but that would be great to freeze the insects and birds?
 For example, I have ephoids on the house wall, north wall. Very great.
 So first the house wall is greened by this and for insects in autumn thousands of insects come and go to the flowers.
 They bloom in autumn and now in spring they carry blue fruits and the birds fall on them.
 It hardly takes space, we only need a wall and plants.
 In the beginning a little watering, otherwise you have to take care of yourself.
 And the cleaning doesn't break, on the contrary, the wall is protected from wind and weather.
 Nice.
 So, we come to the end. I thought I would ask the one million euro question at the end.
 I'm curious if you can start with that, because your book also says what we can learn from birds.
 And when it comes to traffic, we also talk about flying, we fly
 dirty, we fly with fossil fuels with kerosene, do you think that we can learn from birds
 to fly cleanly so not to affect the environment so birds have already invented climate-neutral
 flying dinosaurs actually yes yes yes a hundred million years ago.
 And I think this principle is great.
 We fly too, but unfortunately not climate-neutral,
 but it is an enormous source for the greenhouse effect.
 And if you look at the sky, it's completely cut off. Since there is Fridays for Future, the aircraft industry is now also beginning to think about flying climate-neutral.
 They don't want to give up their business.
 You can do it by taking CO2, the carbon dioxide that makes us angry, and letting water react chemically to it.
 And then you could produce kerosene.
 And that's what you're trying to do.
 Climate-neutral kerosene.
 Well, it requires a lot of energy. Because the energy that is released when flying, when burning kerosene, has to be used again to produce this energy-rich product.
 In other words, if that…
 You have to invent a cycle.
 Exactly. But it has to be supplied energetically. If that succeeds, the flight to Mallorca will not cost 30 euros.
 I don't know how expensive, but it will be much more expensive.
 So not everyone will be able to fly there quickly.
 But I think we should reduce flying as far as possible.
 So really, to the really necessary, flying out of great pleasure and flying somewhere for a few days, you should be ashamed of that.
 We have now invented the flight charm, which welcomes you.
 But there are also things where you can't avoid it.
 Then you have to reduce at another point. The overall balance is crucial.
 We produce about 12 tons of CO2 per head in Germany. I have already reached about 4 tons.
 But I have been practicing for decades. Reducing every year and that makes me incredibly happy and I can only say to do it
 yes actually a nice closing word ernst paul thank you very much for your time i think we will
 see you again at some point and last question are you then you have already
 felt like a bird so you have already jumped out of an airplane? No, no, no. No, for God's sake, I'm scared of heights.
 The bird expert is scared of heights.
 Flying is not my thing.
 When the first meeting in the Bundestag with us in Bonn was to take place,
 all East German members of parliament were to be flown to Bonn by plane from Mecklenburg.
 I was the only one who stood up against it.
 I sat down in the train in the evening and was there in the morning.
 Thanks for your time.
 Ciao.
 Ciao.
 Ciao. Thank you. Thank you.