 We live within planetary boundaries.
 And if we say that the pandemic was an asymmetrical shock,
 something that hit us without us being able to predict it in the broadest sense,
 such or similar shocks will happen again and again.
 They will happen again and again.
 And I have repeatedly pointed out over the last few months that because these are such repetitive
 patterns, it is all the more important that we now use this lockdown to ask such fundamental
 questions.
 So not back to business as usual, so V-curve or U, because V and U would require
 that you can actually more or can control the entry and exit more or less.
 I think it's neither V nor U nor L, it's multiple W.
 So look, this is how it will be for the next few years.
 For economic reasons, political reasons and many other reasons.
 And we could talk again in half a year or in a year
 again, whether my curve of thought was right. But the point is, do we use the time
 to fundamentally ask, is the way we do business, how we do politics,
 how we make decisions, the right way?
 So, a new episode of Young and Naive. We are in Saxony, where exactly?
 We are exactly in the middle of Saxony in the Muldental in Kolditz and here in the middle of the
 clinic chapel of a psychiatric hospital and my name is Stefan Brunhuber.
 I would have asked that right away, because you are Stefan Brunhuber.
 I would have asked that right away, because you are. Stefan, what are you doing?
 Are you the church leader here?
 No, no, no, I am the medical director here.
 We treat patients with psychological diseases and patients with neurological diseases here.
 And that's seven days, 24 hours, from Monday to Sunday, in an area of ​​about 250,000 inhabitants.
 But what are we doing here in the church now? Did you choose this place?
 Actually, I wanted to discuss this with you in the open, under a beautiful oak tree,
 but that does not allow the weather conditions, so that we are now in the church
 . And I think that the topic that we want to discuss today
 is also very accessible for this architecture.
 Because we're talking about faith?
 No, because we're talking about something important, something significant, namely
 in the broadest sense about transformation, about maybe even the art of transformation.
 How can we change ourselves and how it all works.
 So you have a psychiater for a relationship to church?
 Yes, on the one hand it is a diaconal institution here,
 so a church institution, a Protestant institution.
 On the other hand, I myself am also Christian socialized,
 I am Catholic socialized in I am Catholic socialized, former minister and I have had some experiences in this area.
 Are you a believer?
 I am a believer.
 Do you believe in God?
 Yes.
 Why?
 Yes, I believe in God because it brings the individual and me into a relationship with our own end.
 And what comes after that.
 And that is an offer that religions, especially monotheistic religions,
 that is religions that believe in a personal god, can offer well.
 And do you always believe in God or did it develop as an adult?
 I am actually Catholic, Bavarian socialized and therefore I always had a Catholic primary socialization.
 But then I lived in Asia for a long time and also had contact with the Japanese Zen and Chinese Chan Buddhism.
 And I was lucky enough to have a longer stay in the desert fathers around 2003-2004.
 In North Africa, the first Christian communities in the second and third centuries are hardcore eremitas.
 These are people who live in caves, in the desert, alone and meditate.
 You were there?
 I lived there, yes.
 How long did it take?
 It was 2005, 2006.
 I had interrupted my position in Würzburg as a senior doctor
 and had applied many years before and then got a letter that I was allowed to come.
 I was introduced through several stations into the hermitage.
 It is physically, mentally also spiritually demanding.
 What has lured you there?
 I was lured by the change, the change that I experienced autobiographically in the beginning of 2000.
 A change in view of a different understanding of myself and a different understanding of the world and perhaps also a change for view of a different self-understanding and a different understanding of the world
 and perhaps also a change for my own future.
 And it is not uncommon in all religions that such retreats,
 here especially into the North African desert, into loneliness,
 beyond which religion, whether you belong to a religion at all,
 can be an important instrument
 to deal with yourself
 and to perhaps
 make a change
 through this process.
 But what was the trigger
 for your change,
 if it's not too private?
 No, the trigger was simply
 that I had to work a general practitioner at the university at the time,
 with the conditions that I had to work in as a doctor
 in conventional medicine, in school medicine,
 I was no longer satisfied and was looking for a new path for myself.
 And this form of exit, this form of time out,
 was an important step for me to reorient myself.
 Was there no option to stay there completely or something? There was for a moment, but I also realized for myself that I would not have been able to do this
 psychologically and physically. Why?
 Such a work, such an everyday life with a desert father is different from an everyday life
 like you and I live the world. Tell me about it.
 You usually get up between 2.30 and 2.00 in the morning.
 I thought in the afternoon.
 No, in the morning. And you have about 6 to 8 to 10 meditation hours distributed throughout the day.
 And in between you work physically in the library, in agriculture,
 and in between you sometimes give bread, water and olives, maybe an egg.
 Beer? Cigarettes?
 No, no beer, no cigarettes, no media, no iPhone, nothing.
 And every now and then you sleep for another two or three hours.
 And the whole thing is interrupted with so-called phases of intermittent fasting.
 The upper one can say to you, so tomorrow and the day after tomorrow we eat nothing at all.
 And everything goes on like that.
 And tomorrow and the day after tomorrow we don't meet at half past two in the morning,
 but at one or 3. That means that the spiritual practice that is lived there
 forces every novice, every student, every spiritual practitioner,
 to get used to something in a form that never gives them the opportunity to get used to anything.
 But it can be different every day. Every day.
 But why was that?
 That has an important reason.
 And maybe we can talk about that in the course of the conversation.
 Because we actually
 repeatedly
 resort to repetitive,
 regular everyday rituals
 that also stabilize us.
 When do we get up? When do we eat, what do we think about?
 And our own perception, our own body perception, our own thinking,
 our own world perception, depends on what psychologists call identification.
 We have to identify something, anyway.
 And this spiritual practice that has lived there tries to break that.
 Because it is precisely about questioning such regularities, such forms, so to speak, again and again.
 And then you have to throw yourself back strongly and have to give up his known socializations, his known learning processes, his known, as psychologists say, conditioning,
 and is, so to speak, naked self.
 But can anyone do that? I mean, I'm not a believer now, could I go there?
 That is completely independent. You don't have to be a Bavarian minister.
 And the interesting thing is that when you ask, can anyone do that, it refers to an important point that is present in all religions.
 You have to assume that in all religions there are about 3-5% of people who do not follow the classic religious narrative and storytelling,
 but 3-5% follow something that is called a spiritual-mystical tradition.
 This is true in all religions.
 And it's not about reading a text or a personal belief in God with a long beard,
 not allowing yourself to have a girlfriend,
 driving a car or not driving a car, eating meat or not eating meat,
 but it's about a direct experience of transcendence, of infinity.
 And that can be transformative, we know, for 3,000, 4,000, 5,000 years.
 You said you work in agriculture there.
 There is agriculture in the desert.
 Yes, attached to the monasteries, there are for example, they are all self-sufficient. With what? What is growing there?
 There is vegetables, there is also cattle, there are chickens, things like that.
 Everything, but everything very reduced. So the essential things that I remember
 that I ate in the months were eggs an egg white bread a lot of water
 and olives which does not lead to a malnutrition for the duration and there was one
 or the other who certainly had a vitamin c deficiency from my point of view, for example, what What did loneliness do to you? I think loneliness made me become clearer.
 It made me become clearer about myself and what I want.
 And above all, it made me become clearer about my own limits.
 My limits, what I can and what I can't.
 And one of the points was that I probably wouldn't have kept such a life as in the desert for me in the long run.
 The dropout is over 90 percent itself.
 And the waiting lists are long.
 In general, only people with at least one degree are taken there to be presented there at all, to make sure that it is not about economic
 nutrition, but exclusively about a spiritual path.
 But you didn't want to continue your life before that either. You realized that you wanted to change your life.
 Yes, exactly.
 How did that change?
 Afterwards? Yes, of course, a lot happened afterwards.
 You're still drinking water now.
 No, no, no, a lot happened.
 I lived in China for a long time, did an apprenticeship in Chinese medicine.
 I did research in the States for a long time, I met my wife, then I took the position after intermediate stages, after further academic stages,
 now I live in Dresden, I have two great children.
 So a lot happens to change in the social neighborhood,
 but also with me when it comes to lifestyle modifications.
 And every kind of transformation, every kind of change of course not only depends, but also and quite essentially on your own behavior change.
 So the extent of mobility, the extent of meat consumption, the extent of fasting, the extent of silence.
 So all forms that are actually at home in spiritual traditions,
 but which you can also use secularly,
 because they are also connected with the questions of sustainability
 and with the way we want to live together in the 21st century.
 So something has changed that you would't have expected after you came back?
 Yes, that's disruptive. You can't foresee all that.
 I couldn't. That's not a linear process.
 That's a disruptive, non-continuous, if you will, chaotic process process into something that psychologists call a changed awareness of consciousness.
 That means that the way you think about yourself and others changes.
 But weren't you afraid of this chaos?
 Also that. You know that when you go into the desert, you automatically confront not only the things you know,
 but also the things that psychologists call a shadow.
 So the things you don't know.
 Your blind spots.
 Your blind spots. Or the psychologists call it a shadow, a blind spot. You're also confronted with that.
 And the biggest blind spot for an aspiring academic is your own ego.
 What did you learn about that?
 I learned that there are also forms of state that are beyond the ego and that are in the same way satisfying.
 And where other, now there are more technical terms, but I can't avoid it as a psychiatrist, other patterns of affections, other conditions are more important.
 Also other feelings and emotions are important.
 For example?
 For example, affections like humility,
 or empathy,
 or gratitude,
 or serving. Serving? Yes, serving. or gratitude or to serve.
 Serve?
 Yes, serve.
 Serve.
 When I took over this position,
 it was one of my leading emotional conditions
 that I had when I came here ten years ago.
 As a medical director and head, you might think
 that this is the alpha-pig.
 But I had the feeling that this is a function where I can learn to serve a thing, a carrier and a specific the transformations I wanted and thought of,
 not only for myself, but also in a broader environment.
 Have you experienced any transformation that you wanted to prevent?
 Where you thought, I just noticed that this is going in the wrong direction?
 So at this point I actually have a lot of trust in the last few years.
 That if I really implement myself critically and coherently with the topics,
 that it goes in the right direction.
 But let's say another person goes into the desert,
 deals with his own self,
 is it possible that you come across other things? that you do not suddenly appreciate gratitude, gratitude.
 It can be. It can be.
 I was far too little egoistic or something.
 Yes, it can be. That is, for example, a point of stabilizing ego.
 It can be. So that's a very singular individual experience.
 The general thing you're asking about here may have to do with the fact
 that it actually has been the case in all cultures, except modern consumerism since 1950, there were established, standardized phases in which men and women were sent back and forth into loneliness.
 You can recommend this to anyone.
 But isn't it something that is taught to us as children?
 Interestingly, we don't get such affections on the world.
 No?
 No, we develop them first through a socialization that lies beyond the development of the ego.
 Yes, but I mean that.
 Doesn't our parents bring us that automatically?
 Our grandparents, when they grow up with a family?
 Maybe, yes, it can be. Yes, they do. And then we learn that again, or what? It can be. Maybe automatically learn it, our grandparents? Maybe, yes, they do.
 And then we learn it again?
 It can be. Maybe we learn it again.
 I think I learned it again through the stay.
 And it was an important development, an important event for me.
 Because you just mentioned God with a beard, do you imagine God as a man?
 No, I don't have a specific personal image for myself.
 There are many. I lived in America.
 If there is a text, you think of God as a man.
 Yes, yes. It is also legitimate. I don't have that.
 For me it's more about a personal transcendence experience,
 but also about the impersonal, in the Buddhist Zen,
 it's more about the experience of nothingness, of nirvana, of the emptiness, ultimately.
 And if you meditate in a long-term Zen practice, for example,
 then you rather have such experiences.
 Probably it's about both. I'm not a religious scientist and at that point
 only, if you will, a practitioner. But at one or the other point
 maybe refer to one or the other scientific contribution.
 You grew up in Bavaria?
 Yes.
 How was your childhood there? What did your parents do?
 Yes, I come from a family of parents who were both Catholic.
 I was the oldest of three boys.
 And you stayed at home with your mother?
 Classically, traditionally.
 At a farm?
 No, it was a middle-sized company in Augsburg.
 And I grew up there.
 And went to school there?
 Went to school there, got an Abitur.
 Then civil service.
 Not so fast.
 Oh, not so fast.
 Okay, what else do you want?
 As an Abiturist, when you get an Abitur,
 you already have the first idea of what will happen in the future.
 No, I didn't.
 No, no. Because I didn't have that and the only one in my year who refused at the time, that was back then with court proceedings, by the way.
 The military service, yes?
 Yes, yes.
 Why didn't you do it? For me it wasn't an option. I wanted to do something completely different.
 I became a rescue assistant at the Red Cross and did it for 18 months.
 And then I had a longer stay in Africa.
 And then, because I still didn't know it, I took a two-year Kfz mechanic course in Bavaria and in Frankfurt, in Rüsselsheim, at Opel and in the States, at Cadillac. I said to myself, yes, that's clear to me. I want to do this teaching, but I want to study medicine and economics.
 So you can still repair a car?
 I can't repair my car anymore, because everything is electronic in today's cars.
 But I could repair carburetors and gears back and I was able to dismantle and assemble a car well.
 A classic Opel Kadett, for example, which no longer exists.
 But in your studies you came to economics.
 I was fascinated by both things from the beginning. Medicine on the one hand and psychiatry and psychology there in the long term.
 And social sciences and especially economics, sociology and economics.
 Why psychology? There are students who study it because they want to look into their own head. Was that the case with you?
 Yes, self-experience automatically avoided our field. automatically avoid it, but much more important was that it was more
 theoretically motivated in the first years of marriage. I just wanted to know how it is, how the psyche is built up,
 why do I react the way I react, why does a person develop, for example, a
 breakdown or a I have gained a better understanding of such conditions.
 That is perhaps also one of the reasons why I have the position I have here.
 Have you learned something that you would not have expected before?
 Yes, always, every day, constantly.
 Because you constantly confront your own shadow, your own ego, your own biographical things,
 or even those of the patient
 confronted. But that's a process, Timo, that never stops. It doesn't stop with you either.
 It goes to the end of life. And you studied that in parallel, psychology and economics?
 I studied medicine in Ulm and economics. And afterwards? Parallel. Parallel. That works? Yes, then you have to
 get up a little earlier and work longer in the evening.
 And if you coordinate that correctly, and I was a very ambitious student back then,
 and nothing has changed with a part of my ambition today, then it is quite feasible.
 And what about the anger? Sometimes it is, I think, a desire for knowledge and
 on the other hand it is also that I not only know how things work, but how to
 do them practically. My grandfather was a tailor and I found it extremely exciting to forge from a piece of square, for example,
 a square, you know, an 8 mm square, to stow and turn it at the right temperature
 and, for example, to make such a twirl. Extremely demanding.
 It is mentally demanding, sensorimotorically demanding, practically demanding. And to do something like that, not just to think, but to do it, is for me a deep experience of satisfaction.
 What does a psychiatrist say about the saying, everyone is a fortune-teller? Because not everyone is a fortune-teller.
 Yes, that with the fortune- smith is just an allegory.
 The connection is perhaps there that everyone has access to their own, as we say in psychiatry, self-efficacy.
 That means he has access to his autonomous critical thinking and critical doing, and can therefore do things differently.
 And in that sense, but only in this limited sense,
 everyone is his own luck charm.
 You studied Folk Economics, not BWL?
 No, no, so Economics, Sociology and Constance,
 with the focus on macroeconomics, of course.
 What kind of teaching did you get served?
 Was it already in the neoliberal age?
 Yes, it was mixed, it was heterodox.
 Heterodox, right.
 And it wasn't really about me identifying myself in a specific school,
 but it was about understanding the connection between economic processes and our social reality.
 That's what it was about. And the theory was rather post-modern to me. And yet, the economy and the economic sociology provide important instruments
 to better understand social processes.
 I don't want to miss that at all.
 And even today I can draw on that.
 However, I would rather say that at this point, the system theory
 as a theoretical building for understanding economic processes
 is more interesting than specific model formations, which are actually perhaps mathematically and statistically significant,
 but socially irrelevant.
 With system theory I immediately think of Luh think of the system theory of Luhmann?
 No, no, no.
 It's much more general.
 It's more the system theory of the fractal theory of Mandelbrot
 to the chaos theory.
 I'm more interested in things like that.
 So much more abstract at this point.
 And their effects, for example, especially now, here and today and for the future,
 on money and financial markets and, of course, on demand for sustainability.
 You have already mentioned modern consumerism. What has it done to our society?
 Modern consumerism?
 Yes, since the 1950s. Does that have anything to do with society?
 With people?
 With people, with society?
 You have to ask more specifically.
 What does it do with society?
 If we want to consume more and more,
 it changes our thinking, our life,
 the striving for, okay, I want to have a new car i want to have that again i work to consume that does that leads us into something that is called an expansive With the last Mercedes you bought and the last bonus you got, you are only statistically three to four months really satisfied and happy.
 And then the next step comes again. or material or consumeristic satisfaction, it is infinite at that point,
 upwards,
 but will most likely never satisfy you.
 Why is that?
 Why am I dissatisfied after three or four months?
 Yes, because our psyche reacts like that,
 because we adapt to such processes as quickly as possible.
 At different levels, which are relatively similar.
 The bonus or the salary from last year or from the year before last is not enough,
 although nothing has changed at all. It's all relative.
 Most income studies in this context show that it is not about the absolute level of income and wealth, but about the relative.
 So that from me compared to another, or from Germany compared to Europe,
 or from Europe compared to the world.
 Such relative income differences are in a much more significant form
 an incentive for change than absolute numbers.
 Individual change? Yes, or also collective change. an incentive for change as absolute numbers.
 Individual change?
 Yes, or even collective change.
 The satisfaction with your level of well-being,
 that you now have 2020, is certainly not higher than the level of satisfaction of the 60s. Why?
 Because happiness and satisfaction are not just dependent on material processes.
 But we measure that on the GDP.
 We measure that on the GDP. We do that.
 But we measure it in comparison to other GDPs.
 The GDP of 2060 was significantly lower and ...
 1960. The GDP of 2060 was much lower than, for example, the 8% increase, a 10% increase of the GDP of 1960 is in absolute numbers still less than in a 1% increase in 2020. That means the goods that we distribute in addition are still
 bigger now and therefore we are still not necessarily happier. Do you agree?
 Yes, yes. I'm just thinking, there was a study this week from the DIW, where it was
 about the distribution of wealth and also the distribution of income in Germany. What does that do to people when they hear that less and less people in Germany earn more and more
 and more people either earn less or earn the same and that the gap between income and wealth is getting bigger and bigger?
 Is that good for a society?
 Yes.
 Does that motivate those who have less,
 the large majority, to have as much as those at the top?
 I look at this problem of income and wealth differences
 differently than the current discussions.
 How so?
 I distinguish between two forms of inequality, in property as in property.
 Namely one at the minimum of existence, at the basic income,
 so at a threshold that we as a society should not be able to understated.
 And the threshold is in Germany not different from when you grow up in the business zone.
 In Germany, for example, it would mean a free health care, access to the kindergarten,
 maybe even an EVP ticket, free choice of studies, etc.
 And at this point, inequalities are indisputable.
 Above these basic goods, above these social common goods or social commons,
 on which we have agreed as a society,
 we will also have to endure major differences in income and wealth.
 This is also part of the fact that we have decided to live in an open society.
 This means always assuming that these income and wealth conditions been legally acquired and that they have been acquired within ecological planetary boundaries,
 which they are not at all. And there are important corrections needed.
 Will we also have to live with such income differences in open societies, that an industrial worker of a DAX company has significantly less income than the chairman.
 Or like the owners. Why do we have to realize that Ms. Quandt, a billionaire,
 who doesn't work but lets her money work and the money is made by the workers.
 By the others, yes.
 But it's getting richer and richer. Why do we have to endure that?
 Well, I don't belong to the group of people who are working in capital returns because I'm an employee.
 But I have less of a moral, ethical or psychological problem with these capital returns.
 Because if the capital owner places his money properly, socially, ecologically, in a favorable way,
 and makes the right decisions, and makes these decisions in such a way that they are within the legal framework,
 so no insider businesses, no illegal businesses, etc.,
 then such growth increases above the ground,
 which we would have to discuss again, are something that I have to endure,
 because I potentially have the opportunity in an open society,
 should, should and must be able to make such entrepreneurial decisions myself.
 And to lose the risks associated with it, for example, such capital investments.
 The risk at the top of the basic income is of course an individual, entrepreneurial risk.
 At the moment, this is not as secure as it should be.
 We are now seeing in the current case, especially in the context of the whole Covid story,
 where many companies need support after call for action. And these are of course difficult questions.
 If these companies had taken a sufficient insurance on the capital markets,
 there are also technical terms for this, Tim,
 which we call credit default swaps.
 We are in the middle of an important discussion.
 I don't know if that interests you and your listeners, but can we discuss it?
 If so, then it would be for the owner of the company, for the customer who is
 demanding the service or the goods, and also for the tax payer, much cheaper than
 not securing a company.
 The company is driving on the wall.
 Am I talking about your attitude right now?
 Or is that a warning?
 That's maybe a minute or so.
 Oh, let's stop.
 Let's stop.
 Let's stop.
 Can we continue like this?
 Yes, yes. Or? Yes, yes. Or?
 Yes.
 Otherwise, well.
 Tell us.
 These private risk insurance are cheaper than supporting a company in the aftermath via tax money.
 Does that happen?
 It didn't happen in large corporations in the last few months either.
 You know that.
 The state is basically not a better entrepreneur,
 it is just bigger and uses tax money to pay for it.
 I think that you can do it better and more intelligently
 by taking a look at the instruments of the financial markets,
 can be made more intelligent and better.
 If we want to talk about this, Timo, we have to talk about different forms of risk.
 About different forms of risk in the age in which we live now.
 And that is the age, as you always say yourself, the age of the anthropocene,
 the age of man.
 And the age of man means that we live in a time in which we as a species,
 you as a species, so to speak,
 determine the geo-ecological framework conditions essentially caustically determine.
 Can be said.
 From plastic waste, over nuclear energy, over global warming, biodiversity, etc.
 And in such a world there are different and other risk forms
 like in another world, in a previous world.
 The Clapper Fromm says like in an empty, slow, big world.
 We now live in a full, small, fast world.
 And the conditions of space also change.
 And let's maybe distinguish three forms of risk.
 Individual risks, like you and I have them, for example when it comes to health.
 Then systemic risks, like a tsunami or Covid-19 or global warming.
 Such systemic risks are also called asymmetrical shocks.
 They happen and they have to be secured differently than, for example, entrepreneurial risks.
 If you have a company and offer a product or a good, then you have to secure the money and financial markets play an important role in this.
 And we haven't taken that into account enough with large companies and in the medium-term.
 I would like to understand why, I mean, of course,
 Mrs. Quandt, our billionaire, a well-known billionaire in Germany,
 earns her money legally, but is that legitimate on the back of the workers?
 She is the owner of the means of production.
 Ask her.
 I'm asking you.
 There are not only the minimum wage discussions,
 Bernie Sanders said in the election campaign in the US,
 we should not tolerate that there are billionaires in our society.
 That's not good for our society.
 And you have no problem with that.
 I have no problem with a billionaire.
 As long as he wants to live in a society,
 as long as he makes a contribution to the minimum standards
 on which the millionaire and I and you and we all, regardless of whether we have work or not,
 have capital or not, have an education, are intelligent or not, belong to the upper or lower classes,
 that we clearly define the bottom down,
 which is unquestionable.
 But the reality is that in Germany,
 for example, the billionaires give the money to the parties,
 the donations,
 who want to either eradicate this very bottom,
 Indeed.
 or to lay it even deeper.
 But then the question is a different one, Timo.
 Then the question is not whether one has one billion or two billion, but the question is then,
 which social contract do we need to secure the bottom down, not negotiable?
 That's the question.
 So that everyone, if you will, everyone who wants to live in such a society has the possibility to found a start-up above these minimum standards
 and also potentially have a higher potential with their own risk,
 that the network they fall on is not negotiable downwards.
 I agree with you.
 But you think a roof is stupid.
 A roof would be ecological.
 Exactly.
 Ecological, yes, ecological.
 An ecological roof, for example, we have in current discussions about so-called planetary borders.
 So ecological borders that we cannot cross.
 And almost all welfare models that we have in the West, except very few in North Africa and the Middle East. And of course, the super rich are especially concerned,
 because they have a factor of 100, 200, 500 in their welfare model above the CO2 load
 that we have actually foreseen per capita, who constantly cross the borders upwards.
 They cross them ecologically. You know the discussion
 about the planetary boundaries.
 Of course.
 These are the boundaries.
 And this is also the topic
 that played a role in Club of Rome
 in the 1970s, namely the
 boundaries of growth.
 This discussion 50 years later
 we have now again in a
 more differentiated form and has actually given us, even though I was only ten years old at the time,
 again the right to be right in many respects and to be right.
 We'll get to the Club of Rome in a moment. What do you say about the term performance society? As a psychiatrist and economist.
 Yes.
 Are we a performance society?
 Because if I was born as the son of Mrs. Quant,
 then I don't need to perform anything.
 Yes, yes, yes, two ways.
 So, on the one hand, from a psychological point of view,
 I would like to distinguish, two. Is performance and narcissism linked?
 So according to the motto, I am only worth something if I do something.
 We have to look at that and then we are again in the discussion about the minimum standards.
 That means a person is worth something beyond whether he is doing something.
 Whether I decide to be active here at the hospital or you make films or are active frequently or stay at home or go on a world trip.
 Every person has an own value that is not defined by his individual performance profile.
 So a performance-oriented narcissism, so to speak. That's one point.
 Above this insurance, we need incentive structures, we need incentives.
 People have an intrinsic curiosity to discover the world and get benefits for it, but also to be punished, to develop new behavior, to take
 entrepreneurial risks, to make mistakes and then to fall back again and again
 on a ground that is not negotiable. Again, so the difference and with that we are
 again in the context of social policy with questions such as guaranteed minimum income.
 Which I already mentioned.
 Yes exactly, and similar. And these are also the questions that we can and must
 secure downwards in order to ensure exactly the
 innovative capacity that we also need for the
 transformation process upwards.
 This will also increasingly clearly illustrate that
 people are much more risk-prone, more creative,
 if they have the determination to go down.
 That means, according to the motto,
 the socio-economic standards,
 which all the participation in the society in which we want to live,
 for example here in Germany or in Europe,
 that if it is guaranteed to go down
 and simply idealistic,
 would be guaranteed to everyone, regardless of whether he is doing to do something, regardless of whether he has to go through a full-time job to finance himself.
 Above that, creativity, human creativity, curiosity, willingness to innovate, is actually really laid out.
 For me as a psychiatrist, that's almost a law of nature.
 What do you mean by something to achieve? What do we mean by achievement?
 Yes, I have to give the question back to you. What do you mean by that? If we take the distinction between narcissism and performance profile apart,
 what then remains of performance?
 What do you mean by that?
 For the one is that I sit at home and build something and in the end a product comes out. Yes, and the financial expert makes a short sale at Wirecard
 and my grandpa made a square twirl
 and your cousin might decide to go on a world trip
 and the third one goes to Tibet to meditate.
 And the fourth one says, no, I'm double promoted and I want to raise two children and stay at home.
 The concept of performance actually helps us at this point, not further at that point, at that point,
 when the prerequisite conditions are clear, down and up.
 Are you with me?
 Yes.
 This is what we are actually in something that is called the open society, right?
 That's what Karl Popper first described in 1945,
 at the beginning of the Second World War, in a discussion with communism and Stalinism.
 A social project that basically doesn't fit into the left and right narratives, but rather looks at a crossroads.
 So left narratives, right narratives, and you also have a right-wing.
 The authoritarian, the anti-authoritarian. No, the left and the right.
 And the vertical right goes up, to stay in this frame,
 into the open society.
 And down or back, depending on how you use the picture,
 as a picture that is always incomplete,
 ultimately into autocracies, in closed relationships.
 I meant with authoritarian, anti-authoritarian, open.
 And this discussion that Popper described in 1945,
 which we actually believed to have ended with the fall of the Wall and the developments of the 1990s as ended, had believed.
 At the end of history.
 Yes, that was Fukuyama.
 We now have this discussion in the 21st century again.
 Again we have to ask ourselves the question that it is actually not about left or right narratives.
 It's not about socially democratic left and extreme left, and not about conservative narratives.
 It's about a social design that is sufficiently limited to digital autocracies as a liberal social contract in the 21st century.
 And that's Karl Popper in his further developments.
 Only the topics are different from 1945.
 The topics are now global warming, global warming.
 The topics are now forced migration, loss of biodiversity,
 income differences, as you just mentioned,
 unstable financial markets,
 dealing with failed states, asymmetric wars.
 That means the topics are different, if you will.
 Even pandemics are part of it.
 But the social reality is very similar.
 Maybe you know the psychoanytist Erich Fromm?
 I've heard of him.
 You've heard of him?
 Yes.
 He wrote a book about the fear of freedom.
 He asked himself the question, why do people fear freedom?
 And he said, it has something to do with the fact that when we are released into freedom, we are reflexively seeking conformism.
 So we do what everyone else does.
 Or we follow the seductions of autocracies.
 We give freedom back and let someone else decide over us.
 Or thirdly, we abuse this freedom in the sense of self-destruction or self-destruction,
 which neoliberalism has pushed on in the 90s.
 And Popper then says in 1945, there is a fourth way, namely the way to an order of freedom.
 And that is the concept that we need politically in society, in dealing primarily with autocracies.
 If you look at the numbers, we say 7.5 billion people worldwide.
 About half of humanity around 2020 lives in western and or democratic,
 right-wing buildings that are very close to the concept of open society.
 And the other half live in autocracies or failed states, roughly.
 And that's the question of how to deal with a watershed.
 With which social contract, Timo? That's central.
 Tilo.
 Tilo, sorry. With which social contract, Timo, that is central, Tilo, excuse me, with which social contract, Tilo, can the disagreements we are talking about here and today be better resolved?
 With digital autocracies, i.e. with closed relationships, or with liberal orders of an open society.
 For me, that is the actual central issue.
 And all that we experience in the media between the smallest common man,
 between one party program and the other, and the left and the right,
 that's more rituals that don't ask the decisive questions from my point of view.
 Does our turbocapitalism fit into your open society?
 No, it doesn't. Of course not.
 Why not?
 It destroys the planet, promotes inequality in the world.
 Yes, exactly.
 It destroys biodiversity.
 Yes, exactly. It doesn't fit.
 1992, in the so-called Washington consensus,
 have you heard of it?
 At that time, in the aftermath of the fall of the Wall,
 the world community, especially in the west, in the north,
 decided that deregulation, privatization,
 is the narrative that explains the world to us.
 And that not only more prosperity arises through this narrative,
 but also the creation of a right-wing democracy.
 Today, from the point of view of political scientists,
 we call this a so-called liberal overstretch.
 That is, liberalism has shot out of the goal and has expanded economically on one side, if you will,
 and has overlooked the other area, the political area of ​​rights and integration into a larger framework of order.
 And that has changed significantly in the last 10, 20 years, it has become much different, better. And the current situation, the 2008 crisis back then,
 and now with Covid,
 shows again in which overall constellation we are,
 that we now have to ask ourselves even more than 20, 30 years ago,
 in which social formation do what we want to live.
 When you mentioned the crisis of 2008-2009, did we draw the right lessons from it?
 No, we didn't.
 Not enough.
 We as Germany introduced austerity in Europe,
 i.e. the policy of saving, or rather forced it.
 We made our neighbours poorer.
 Yes.
 Jealous, probably also us.
 You know, there are two kinds of things.
 When you discuss this theoretical question as an academic,
 you can very quickly come to results that are better in the end.
 If you are in the middle of the political executive,
 you are also under the pressure to make decisions in time.
 In retrospect, a lot could have gone differently.
 And an even bigger connection,
 one might say today, also in the background of the pandemic and the ongoing unresolved problems,
 that we have to discuss the question of how we want to live together, even in the background of sustainability standards, in a much more radical and fundamental way.
 I mean, I think so.
 I have talked to Peter Altmaier and many other leading politicians in the last few months since Corona.
 There is the attitude that we have to go back to where we were before the crisis.
 Yes, I think that's an illusion.
 That's an illusion.
 Look, if we say we live on planetary borders.
 What was that? We live on planetary borders. What was that?
 We live on planetary borders.
 And if we say that the pandemic was an asymmetrical shock,
 something that hit us without us being able to predict it, in the broadest sense,
 such or similar shocks will happen
 again and again. They will happen again and again. And I have always pointed out
 that in the last few months, because they are such repetitive patterns, it is all the more important that we now use this lockdown
 to ask such fundamental questions. So not back to business as usual, so V-curve or U, because V and U
 would require that you can actually control the entry and exit more or less.
 I don't think it's V, U or L, it's multiple W. So look, this is how it will be going on for the next few years.
 For economic reasons, political reasons and many other reasons.
 And we can talk again in half a year or in a year, whether my curve of thought was right.
 But the point is, do we use the time to fundamentally ask, is the way we do business, how we do politics, how we make decisions, the right one?
 And we are not yet asking these fundamental questions. And that is why it is also very expensive.
 But now the question is, why do we ask these questions? Has the crisis, the pandemic, not yet been painful enough so that we want to go to the doctor and ask him
 what kind of medicine do I have to throw in or how do I have to change my life because now it's still
 like that it hurts but I'm making a patch on it and then it goes on again why
 do we ask ourselves the questions not the questions will be addressed to politicians, we do that too, others do that, but they are being rejected.
 I also ask myself this question.
 And sometimes I think it has something to do with the information state that the political executive has,
 and sometimes it falls behind what we already have in civil society in terms of discussion.
 So we often don't discuss this at eye level.
 What we as a society, as a second or third sector discuss,
 doesn't always come from the political sector.
 On the other hand, it also has very practical reasons,
 such as the pressure of decision of today and tomorrow and the day after tomorrow.
 And thirdly, I think it also has something to do with the fact that we as a society have
 difficulties in general to talk about taboos. And one of the last big taboos
 that we cannot actually talk about in the media and in the public debate is the construction of the money and financial system.
 We can talk about power, we can talk about money, we can talk about sex, more or less.
 Also in the broadcast.
 And these are taboos that are tolerated or accepted in general society. Who has more power, who has less power, etc.
 But we cannot yet talk about the impact of the financial system on our lives
 and what we should change to can be different. I like the image of the funnel here.
 A funnel is something in system theory that is called an attractor.
 And an attractor is something that somehow attracts all other variables,
 whether you want it or not.
 From education, to demographic development, to education, to digitization, to wars, to the economy, etc.
 And if you take this picture of the funnel, which is also a frame in your head,
 and transfer it to the current debate, you actually come to a picture that looks essentially like this.
 You look at the funnel from above.
 And you may know in the debate on sustainability that one always makes a triangle,
 social, economic, ecological.
 This is this non-survivalable triad or something like that.
 The picture is wrong, because the picture suggests a dilemma from the beginning,
 which is only there in this form if you follow this frame. If you change the frame in your head,
 Thilo, for example from the triangle to the funnel, then you have a different picture in your head. And you have roughly such a picture,
 where on the outside the ecology,
 i.e. the environment, is,
 then the economy or the social
 and in the core
 is another attractor, namely
 the way in which our
 financial system is built on itself.
 It is somewhat the meta-system,
 that every of our actions today and tomorrow, in the north and in the south, in the small and in the big. I don't want to mention any technical terms. Money is nothing neutral.
 Money is, because we briefly talked about economic theory at the beginning,
 money is not a neutral veil between me and the good and me and the service or me and you,
 where you can only look through. But money is something that determines our encounter, our exchange,
 if you sell something to me, I sell something to you, from the beginning.
 And money is something that does not happen by nature, but it is something that we have done ourselves.
 It is a social invention, a convention.
 Basically something like an association,
 where we might have to sit down and say,
 is it still true in the way of the discussions
 that we have to conduct for the next 20, 30, 50 years?
 Or maybe we have to change this association, this marriage contract, or whatever.
 Maybe. And where do we change it and how do we change it
 so that our future is worth living and is affordable?
 And so we are in a completely different debate
 than when we talk about sustainability as a demographic problem,
 because we have too many people on earth.
 A completely different debate when it comes to the question of which technology we use for it.
 And a completely different debate
 that we both meditate from morning to evening, become vegetarians and ride bikes,
 then the world will change.
 Not really.
 It won't happen.
 It won't happen because the money and financial system are still the same.
 In many respects.
 There is a debate about sustainability and climate protection, many in politics, but also other people say,
 can we afford it?
 What?
 Climate protection.
 The radical change we would have to make to save the planet,
 can we afford it?
 But you could also say, CO2 emissions, unlike money, are not artificial.
 Money, you just described it, is a ...
 Basically, the question, Thilo, which is perhaps the most important question for my and your generation,
 namely the question of how we actually finance the whole thing?
 How should it be in the future? Can we afford it?
 How do we finance it? That's the central question, isn't it?
 And if you discuss this, you can discuss this exemplarily with the 17 sustainability goals.
 The UN decided in 2015, as a world community we decided,
 that we want to implement 17 sustainability goals by 2030, 2035.
 Preventing poverty and hunger and much more.
 Also the protection of biodiversity and global warming and technology, sales, infrastructure, much more.
 There are very few so-called global roadmaps or landmarks on which the world community has decided and agreed so politically consensually as these UN Charter. Very few.
 It was the UN's greatest process of opinion-making ever since its existence, with hundreds of panels and population surveys and expert surveys. In the end, everyone agreed.
 And the most exciting thing about this discussion is
 that everyone wants it, roughly speaking.
 All people want it.
 And we also have the technology for that.
 We know how to screw a solar panel on the roof.
 We know how to train kindergartners and doctors.
 We also know how to set up a wind farm and we know how to fight malaria.
 We know how to set up an intensive care unit and we know how a university works.
 We know all of that.
 We have the complete technology that will continue to develop, but we have it all there in the core.
 We even have a political consensus and beyond that something completely different.
 We have an immensely robust scientific evidence over all 17 goals,
 how this should go scientifically.
 We have not discussed only one question, namely the question of where the money should come from,
 to finance these seven goals.
 And that is indeed the crucial question on the way of transformation into the future.
 Where does the liquidity come from to finance these seven goals?
 For me, for my generation.
 We are the last generation that has to answer this question.
 Somewhere.
 The saying just came to mind, we can imagine the end of the world, but not the end of capitalism.
 That's a narrative I don't follow.
 You don't like that. I just wanted to bring it in. Let's see how you react.
 I thought about it. When it comes to how we counter-finance it,
 in my view, it's not about creating capitalism.
 Overcome?
 Rather, that we bring it to another form of aggregation.
 And let's then distinguish what capitalism means.
 I'm talking here about financial capitalism,
 about financial markets, about money and financial systems,
 about the way money is created, about regulatory,
 about central bank mandates, about taxation, about the way in which money is created and how money comes into the world
 to do good things, to do meaningful things.
 Not only, but also under competitive conditions.
 I don't know if it makes sense, I recently spoke to an investor who said, you know, we are already living in a Marxist age.
 I said, I didn't understand that, explain that to me.
 He said, you know, when you talk to an institutional investor, and these are people who have large pension funds, I'm talking about a size of 5 to 7, 9 billion US dollars, equivalents.
 Then the money from employers, over their entire business biography,
 they have put this money back to then have a safe pension.
 That means that this money actually belongs to the community, it belongs to the worker.
 There is one at the top, namely the manager who earns a lot overproportionately,
 but who has to invest this crisis money in such a way that everyone, the baby boomer who is now going into retirement, also gets his pension.
 The abolishment of capitalism would mean that we abolish it and that we bring 60, 80 million baby boomers,
 who will retire in the next few years, to their earned bread.
 We have to be much more intelligent in this regard than just abolishing fossil capitalism,
 abolishing financial capitalism.
 Think about the whole discussion about credit default swaps,
 about derivative trade. It has completely disappeared in the public eye without bringing in the real
 common sense of what the importance of this important financial instrument is in the risk-saving of companies.
 Completely disappeared.
 You mean the derivatives?
 The derivatives.
 Yes, but that makes sense in agriculture, if the farmer ...
 For example, and so on, that there were people here who had abused this derivative trade in the OTC,
 i.e. in the over-the-counter, in the unregulated area, is clear. But that does not speak against
 the instrument itself, but against those who use it and against a reinforced regulation of it.
 For example, shall we make it concrete or is it too abstract?
 No.
 You're interrupting me if it's too abstract. The flight of a large private air travel company from Frankfurt to Buenos Aires cannot take place because a pandemic has broken out.
 And then this flight company calls the Ministry of Finance and says, I now need two-digit amounts of money or millions to finance it, the CDS market, the Credit Default Swap Market, would have had an offer.
 It would look like this. The seat from Frankfurt to Buenos Aires has to be secured
 through the default market. That costs something. And these costs have must be priced in the seat, if I want to fly there, and the balance must be regulated.
 The CDS market is extremely volatile, up and down, but also extremely low. It is a market of 25 to 60, 65 billion, so there is a lot of liquidity.
 They can guarantee you a very specific entrepreneurial risk.
 You can guarantee everything you want through the CDS market.
 Everything. Almost everything. Even the cat bonds. You can do everything.
 Is not a problem in itself.
 Technically, there are experts who control it.
 But then the services and the flight supplies will be more expensive.
 You can check that out and then think about whether the flight makes any sense at all.
 Who pays for the whole thing? A completely different question.
 But here it becomes clear again in this example that it can be market-based instruments that can secure entrepreneurial risk much more reasonably, cheaper, more efficiently for the community than the ways we are now taking, that we are taking a risk insurance on tax money, which our children, your and my children, and the future have to finance. That's expensive.
 That's expensive. The principle is, let's do it, in the sense of, don't regulate us.
 Don't give us rules, for example these credit defaults and so on.
 So, everything you should award, leave those rules aside.
 But as soon as we're fucked up, we can all pay again.
 We socialize pay again. We are quasi socializing our losses.
 This is not an order of freedom. This is not an open society.
 In Germany there is a professional movement for this.
 So we don't have an open society in Germany?
 Or how open is our society? Or how autocratic is Germany?
 Yes, I can't answer that. I can't answer that. We live in one of the best times and the best societies in this world.
 Not just because of Covid-19 and not just because of the current health care here in Saxony and Germany.
 I am partly responsible for this, in a very small way, compared to many other parts of the world, but also in the field of education, social security, internal security and in many other areas.
 But how far are we from your ideal of an open society?
 Yes, you know, what Popper described back then and now in the implementation into the 21st century is of course, if you will,, it's an idealistic construct. And we are with the instruments that we have, to use the example of the economy,
 for example with the Freiburg school of the ortholiberal approach, on the way to an order of freedom.
 On the way there.
 Claims of arrest must be clarified.
 If you make a product, we have the so-called supply chain law last week.
 Last week? This week? Through the Bundestag? No, not quite yet, but discussed by Udo Müller.
 Yes, but what is the basic idea? That's a good example.
 That's the basic idea. So a so-called total cost analysis, we would say at the club.
 Companies, when they offer a product, must not only start to produce transparency through their delivery chains,
 but also have to potentially price these costs.
 The jeans cost five euros more.
 Because, for example, children cannot be exploited, children should not work, because nature should not be exploited.
 That's how it is.
 And this delivery chain is a very good approach,
 in the implementation it would not always be that easy,
 because as an academic it is easy to discuss something,
 but you don't have to do it practically.
 But in the matter it comes very close to this approach.
 So we start with the costs upstream and downstream,
 from the product to the manufacture of the product and then to the sale,
 into the whole value creation process.
 We are finally getting more and more honest.
 And then we are more and more in an open society. Only the way there, and this is only the question of sustainability,
 the way to a so-called more sustainable open society,
 the mechanisms that we need to make this possible,
 are market-oriented, autoliberal laws at this point,
 and not autocratic.
 That's a central difference, you know?
 There are countries where decisions are simply made.
 Here in our western democracies and right-wing societies, things are decided democratically.
 Societies decide things democratically. And the question that is connected here and that we also discuss in the environment of membership in the World Academy of Sciences, for example,
 is which formation, i.e. digital autocracies or also from the societies, can actually solve the problems we are discussing here tonight.
 At first glance, it looks like digital autocracies that simply regulate,
 that simply decide, can actually do it better and faster and more efficiently.
 At first glance?
 At first glance, but only at first glance.
 Do you know the ...
 Do we have a little time left?
 Sure.
 Okay.
 Do you know the constitutional lawyer Böckenförde?
 No.
 He died last year in February and he set up a theory.
 That's called the Böckenförde theory.
 He said, open societies, is what is described here,
 open societies live on conditions
 that they cannot create themselves.
 Namely, autonomous, critical,
 engaged, thinking people.
 If they are missing, there is no open society.
 You can't create that through a right-wing force.
 And if you take this idea, this figure of thought, and take it into the current discussion
 about open societies versus digital autocracies in the 21st century,
 you can formulate a Böckenförde 2.0.
 That means the following.
 Digital autocracies live on conditions that they cannot create themselves.
 These are conditions that can only be created in open societies.
 A price formation on a market is only created by a price created on a market, it doesn't arise in a plant economy.
 And a free investigative journalism, which can distinguish between fakes and facts, is only available here.
 And a training system that is idealistic in terms of creativity, autonomy and self-efficacy,
 and people bring into their curiosity, their entrepreneurship and self-interest, that only exists in open societies.
 And social capital that builds up autonomy, autonomy, freedom,
 social capital, trust, is only available in open societies.
 Even the results of the scientific enterprise, social capital, trust, only exists in open societies.
 And so on and so on and so on.
 Even the results of the scientific enterprise in its radical, disciplinary and interdisciplinary criticism
 and the results associated with it,
 are not in a closed society in which a party official sits at the table and ultimately decides what happens to the results.
 But the results that are produced in open societies, that we use, are used to stabilize digital autocracies.
 Because digital autocracies also need a price. Digital autocracies also need the distinction between fakes and facts.
 If you don't know whether the Covid pandemic is systemic or not,
 then a party functionary is of no use to you.
 But only a basic researcher who asks the radical questions of a pandemic epidemiology.
 And nothing else.
 Nothing at all. And if you want to know whether global warming is a fake or means facts, then it is only about investigative journalism and a free scientific enterprise that is financed, for example, by tax money and not financed by industry or not trapped by the party apparatus in Spain.
 That's the crux of the problem 2.0 and that's why I'm actually confident that our problem-solving strategies,
 the problem-solving strategies of a liberal agenda, which is about error-safety, about a search algorithm that is market-oriented, which essentially includes ortholiberal conditions,
 which represents search behavior,
 where individual autonomy, attachment, responsibility, curiosity,
 creativity, intelligence, change of perspective.
 You know, something like, I'm not of your opinion, but I also want you to do everything in the future so that you can also say your opinion in the future.
 Or sentences like, no one is 100% wrong. The real problems that are ahead of us, from Covid to failed states, to volatile financial markets, to the next pandemic, to biodiversity loss and lack of democracy, are all things that can only be corrected on the basis of critical thinking.
 And that's what happens with Popper and the open society.
 What does an open society or a democracy do
 with climate change, when societies decide democratically
 that we don't do anything, or rather don't do enough?
 Do we ride democratically into the abyss Or with an open society into the abyss?
 No, but look, I trust the normativity of the factual.
 I trust the public, fear-free discourse.
 The commitment of experts, scientists, public, critical citizens.
 We've seen that with Corona, that this works.
 Why? Because it became concrete.
 Yes.
 But with climate change ...
 Oh, you mean the distinction now.
 No, but it's a good example.
 We noticed Corona right away.
 We saw the pictures in Italy.
 We know people who either got sick or died.
 We see the numbers.
 With climate change, if it really reaches reaches us, it's almost too late.
 Yes, then it's too late.
 We have to learn to predict the abstract as a society.
 Now I understand your question.
 The first thing I learn and what I emphasize in the discourse with the political executive is that we can no longer do things like it doesn't work, it doesn't exist, because of the decisions in post-COVID.
 Nobody can get out of that number who has to make political decisions today.
 Nevertheless, you will try again.
 Yes, no, no. And that's a mistake. And that's a mistake in the double sense.
 It is politically and economically unfair because it makes us politically unstable and because it will cost us a lot of money. I understand that political representatives in the executive office need a reset as soon as possible under the pressure of the fact that they make decisions every day.
 I can understand that in a single case and yet such systemic questions are allowed, that we ask these fundamental questions, for example financial markets and so on.
 But you also have the pressure because you want to keep your power.
 Yes, that's the power.
 But they want to be re-elected.
 Yes, they want to, yes.
 And then you make short-term decisions.
 Yes, I think so. Yes, that's one aspect.
 But yes, a lot has been investigated.
 Everyone wants to stay in power and everyone just wants to be re-elected.
 So it's not that important the representatives I'm talking about.
 Of course, if you stay in the discussion, you also want to make a decision.
 And that would be the same for me.
 If I were to say now, this is our model, yes, with these financial markets,
 then I would also like to stay as close as possible and as long as possible in the public,
 political-based debate
 to influence the process.
 And at this point I will always have to make concessions,
 have to make compromises, because I want to control the process,
 accompany, comment.
 This is a normal and legitimate and also ethically acceptable position.
 But back to the question of why we don't change.
 Covid yes, climate no.
 This is a question that always concerns us in the background of the psychology,
 of environmental psychology.
 There are many factors.
 One is, for example, that the topic is extremely abstract. Extremely abstract.
 Or far away.
 Secondly, not sensorically noticeable.
 If I tell someone, if you don't keep a distance here, you'll get intubated and die, you will keep the distance from Covid.
 But if we say, yes, we will have heat storms and tsunamis in 30 years, then it is not sensorically predictable.
 And the third is that it is complex. But complex is not complicated.
 You have to make the distinction at this point. And I think an essential reason why we can't get any further in the climate debate
 has something to do with these three factors and with something else.
 That we can experience the temperature increases, and that we can measure them, that are also indisputable.
 Temperature increases 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, so let's talk about 2 and 3 degrees scenario,
 we can do that in a single case,
 that we have to bring them into balance with economic growth and redistribution.
 That's not an easy question.
 And I'll tell you why. If you look at a global UN panel, where the UN has asked more than 10 million people worldwide,
 representative worldwide, not just 18-year-olds from Scandinavia, which they would like to do,
 from the global upper class, but people representative of the whole world.
 And then set these seven goals, roughly.
 Do you know what the first four or five goals are?
 Health, job, kindergarten, nutrition, anti-corruption.
 And do you know what the last goal is? Global warming.
 Now we can argue very easily from the global north, from the global upper class,
 the whole world must now follow this narrative of correcting the temperature.
 The majority of the world population, Indians and other countries in the world, have a completely different narrative. And if we weigh these two things together, the question becomes extremely complex.
 I don't want to say unsolvable, but extremely complex.
 And the goal is that we can deal with the economic question of welfare development for the
 majority of the world population, with the question of temperature development as a basic parameter,
 i.e. temperature in Celsius on the one hand and BIP on the other,
 with all its advantages and disadvantages that the two have,
 we have to bring them together.
 But how?
 Yes, that's the question.
 Do you have a vision?
 No, that's not a vision.
 Do you have a vision how to get that done?
 What do you mean vision?
 I mean, we're back to the topic of the financial system.
 We're back to a topic that is so fundamental again.
 Then get more specific. How can we approach and solve this?
 The specific question of global warming, for example. Or what specific question do you mean?
 Financial system.
 Financial system.
 Money and financial system.
 Okay, let's stick to the topic.
 Do we have to abolish something? Do we have to ban something?
 No, no, it's...
 Re-distribute?
 Yes.
 Let me put it this way.
 We have numerous instruments to adjust the financial system, so to speak.
 We have them.
 to adjust the financial system, so to speak, we have them. And I think that's a great format that I'm going to tell you about the topic for an hour now,
 about all these instruments. But I'll just name a few, just a few.
 We know, for example, that we roughly for the sustainability goals,
 these 17 sustainability goals, to give an example, this is also part of the global warming issue,
 need approximately 4 to 5 billion additional purchasing power liquidity
 to finance them. Approximately.
 So German billions, not American trillions.
 Approximately.
 We can use the conventional mechanisms of redistribution,
 by, for example, taxing offshore places, or taxing the upper 10%,
 or taxing companies, or taxing CO2,
 not even reach the standard of magnitude.
 We are roughly at the taxing around the factor of 10,
 below what we actually need.
 We get 200, 300 billion, 500 billion.
 In which the money is taken away and given there.
 Another mechanism that also works for this so-called redistribution
 are philanthropy and charity.
 If you are very rich, you can take part of the money,
 you have it somewhere, you take it out,
 you make a foundation and finance your sustainability.
 Spare money.
 Okay. But the mechanism is redistribution. And that's important, but that's just one building block of the whole thing.
 We need another one. We don't need another one, we need others. One is something that we call an ex-swap.
 It's getting very technical now.
 Exciting.
 Yes, okay, then everything is fine.
 I just don't want you to say that everything is too theoretical for you and so on.
 I'll be complaining if I don't get along anymore.
 One is called an ex-swap.
 A swap is a change, a exchange loan. Imagine, even more concrete,
 do you want to have it concrete? Yes? Are you still there? I'm there. Super, super. So, quite concretely. Imagine,
 the Vatican decides to leave the so-called brown fossil investments and
 enter the green ones. Okay? Can he do that into the green. Okay, he can do that.
 Many large companies, foundations, universities do that.
 They withdraw from the brown fossil investments and then go into the green.
 Sell the brown ones and are somewhere in the green wind parks.
 But you can say that this is a meaningful action for the individual company,
 because then the Vatican or the foundation or the university suddenly has a green balance.
 For the environment this is irrelevant, because the coal power plant that was just sold in the Vatican to the foundation, to the university,
 which continues to pollute the air, usually even with slightly worse management, what would wouldn't have sold. So we need a double instrument,
 let's call it an ex-swap. And it looks like this. You are now a member of the
 Vatican, Thilo, and you say, okay, I want to get rid of my 500 billion brown
 investments. Then the instrument would have to look like the company that the company that has the coal industry, for example,
 as an example now, the management would say, okay, the first event is, you have to turn it off, so X.
 You get a good salary, a good bonus, so that you can close the building.
 Because only you can do it best, you can't do it, neither can I.
 But the one who has been burning the thing all day knows how to turn it off again.
 This has to be built into the entire purchase price.
 But then you've only closed the hut.
 But then you need a swap, an equivalent swap.
 So an equivalent change of the nominal value that was in there to something that is green.
 The order of magnitude, let's say, extreme example, reforestation of the sub-Sahara.
 300 billion, 500 billion. Then you drove that down and created an equivalent in the green marketplace.
 That's one instrument.
 May I try to translate that?
 We're currently in a coal outflow,
 where coal-fired companies are also being damaged,
 let's say with one billion euros.
 Let's take that as the number.
 And this one billion,
 which you get as compensation
 for shutting down your coal-fired plants,
 should you then, for example,
 put it in the sub-Sahara for reforging?
 In parts.
 That would be the idea.
 So not that you keep it on account.
 The manager will then also get a bonus when he puts it down.
 But at the same time it is much more important that the capital owner, namely the institutional investor, who represents the 80 million baby boomers,
 who have restricted their wage demands for 30-40 years,
 to retire now and say, if you close the box for me, I won't have a pension.
 He wants to have a nominal value, a counter value.
 For the institutional investor it doesn't matter whether he drill a hole and pump oil there or plant a tree.
 Ultimately, it doesn't matter to him.
 The only thing that matters is that the nominal value allows him a return to serve his customers.
 That's an element, okay?
 An element, that's always an X-swap.
 But you're not through yet. You're not through yet.
 I'll tell you one more thing.
 Let's say you're an Indian rice farmer, okay?
 And you know that you probably have to expect a lot of deal with extreme climate change, dryness,
 and thus, with a certain probability that is not predictable for you,
 you slip into poverty.
 You can no longer take care of your children, they can no longer go to kindergarten, etc.
 The conventional instrument is a so-called, it is called harvest, harvest default, so to speak, harvest-outfall bond.
 Okay, let's call it that technically. And it looks like this, that for example the UN or the World Bank
 offers 100 million Indian a such bond and says, we'll secure you for the case and we'll get the money from private investors.
 Okay? Okay? If we're lucky, we don't have to pay you. If we're unlucky, you're insured.
 But then we have to pay the private investor for it. The money has to be paid back as private money.
 How do you get private investors to do that?
 No, that's not that difficult. There are such cat bonds, but the difficulty is even more fundamental.
 Is it really necessary that a World Bank, a European Central Bank, to use two major banks, which are different constitutional organs,
 really have to approach the private investor to make private money for the insurance of hundreds of millions of Indian rice farmers. Could it not be different technically?
 What would be an example if the ECB or the World Bank
 provided this money in the framework of what is technically called quantitative easing,
 i.e. a process of money creation.
 So that there is no believer and no debtor.
 Cut the middleman or what?
 That's how it is. And the World Bank creates this, let's say, 50 billion cat bond.
 Their balance is getting bigger. Now it doesn't come to an event.
 That means the farmers won't become poor. Then the balance remains.
 Now they have to pay off the money and then the balance will be lower accordingly.
 So what?
 Idealtypically, it is a public institution.
 That means we have to look at the point, if we look really smart,
 not at the point, with the instrument, not always and everywhere and the abolishment of capitalism and so on,
 not at this point with such an instrument, with such a cat bond,
 not to wrap the entire amount over the private investor and thus owe us for the next 50 years,
 but to simply provide this additional liquidity for the insurance of such or similar risks.
 And if you develop this thought further, you will reach an extremely complex, but for me
 a goal-oriented debate about something that is called parallel liquidity.
 The technical term, you can google it, is CBDC, Central Bank Digital Currencies, so regulators, central banks create additional liquidity.
 And now comes the point, they intelligently link to the most modern third, fourth generation blockchain technology
 and guarantee via a so-called smart contract that the money
 should go exactly there and not somewhere else.
 If an event like this happens, for example a Harvard default, an extreme weather situation
 where 100 million rice farmers in India are being brought to the poverty line,
 maybe they all have a mobile phone,
 large parts have a mobile phone,
 then this liquidity is played on the mobile phone
 via a blockchain technology.
 Within seconds.
 Boom!
 And with that, for example, you have not completely,
 but on long distances,
 solved the problem of corruption.
 Not completely, but on long distances. And you of corruption. Not completely, but on long distances.
 And you have ensured that the money goes exactly where it should go
 and not stuck somewhere in the middleman.
 And you can go one step further.
 The smart contract,
 that's what the blockchain discussion is about,
 I'm involved in some parts,
 the smart contract can be configured in such a way I'm involved in some parts.
 The smart contract can be configured in such a way that the things, the money, are only given out for certain things.
 Because it's digital money.
 Imagine, with that money you can't buy machine guns, no alcohol, no cigarettes. Because we know that, for example, Indian families, where the man who is working
 is a smoker, have a 10 to 20 percent chance that the family will slip into poverty
 because the money is not spent on food, but on cigarettes or alcohol. With such a smart contract algorithm you can ensure that the woman who has the money on her account,
 for example, buys rice or water.
 But isn't that part of this digital autocracy, that the autocracy prescribes to you what you don't consume?
 I know the discussion. But that's a legal question.
 No, that's not digital autocracy.
 Because the 17 goals we agreed on
 were not decided autocratically,
 they were decided democratically.
 We as a world community,
 we can't get out of the number now,
 we as a world community
 decided on this roadmap on September 15, 2015.
 Now in retrospect to say in retrospect,
 no, now we don't want them anyway,
 now we're doing consumer sovereignty,
 everyone does what he wants,
 that will be difficult.
 That will be very, very difficult,
 Thilo.
 That just reminded me a little bit of China,
 there is this social scoring,
 and if you smoke in public,
 then your social scoring falls, you smoke in public, your social scoring drops.
 And that reminded me of your rice farmer, who gets the money through your great idea, but doesn't buy cigarettes.
 Yes, but wait, we are in a dilemma situation.
 Dilemma situations are classic for complex modern societies, typical.
 You never get out of them completely. All complex
 systems, all complex situations, all complex societies produce dilemmas,
 i.e. contradictions. And it's not about resolving the contradictions, but it's about
 understanding the contradictions, so to speak, and finding the right balance. If the rice farmer wants to buy his cigarettes,
 which by the way produces massive social and ecological externalities,
 which he has to answer in parts himself at some point,
 otherwise he is in kindergarten, then the whole thing becomes infantile,
 then he can do it with conventional money.
 But as soon as it moves in the CBDC, he doesn't do it.
 And so there are, I would say, two, three dozen instruments that you have to bring together.
 And if we do this intelligently, I'm leaning out a system on a European level.
 And we have no poverty in Europe in two years with such a system.
 That means we have to rebuild the ECB, or rather give a new mandate.
 Maybe democratize it a bit.
 Yes, but Jens Weidmann is very proud that he can't be voted off.
 Yes, I wouldn't raise that question too high.
 The decisive thing for me at this point is two things.
 On the one hand, the expansion of the central bank, at this point, there are further questions, but at this point, as you ask,
 an extended central bank mandate in favor of sustainability.
 Okay? In addition to many central banks, we have price stability as a feature.
 As a second feature, about two-thirds also have the issue of unemployment.
 And the third expansion of the mandate would be sustainability, for example.
 This decision is a decision that is made in democratic parliaments.
 Then go vote and vote a party that wants exactly that, that in the future, Mr. Weidmann,
 has an extended central bank mandate, so that he can create additional green liquidity
 to finance sustainability in Europe.
 Does this also have to do with the modern monetary theory?
 Partially.
 This is a further development that we ...
 This is only a further development of MMT, right?
 Part of it is MMT, of course.
 Of course, this is MMT. Partially.
 This is also logical.
 Partially. Not quite.
 So the blockchain comes with it, the parallelization comes with it,
 conventional money, parallel money, blockchain comes with it and some others.
 But in fact, this is a further development that has a lot to do with MMT.
 I would even put it differently.
 If we don't consider this or a mechanism very similar to that,
 I say this in the weakened form,
 the political costs for open societies and the economic costs for the North and the South
 and for the future of nature, is far too high.
 That means we would have a very similar mechanism sooner or later,
 with a high probability.
 The question is, is it democratically wanted and controlled?
 Or will it be implemented, as in some large digital autocracy,
 in parts from September, to October this year,
 already implemented, by, for example, China decided to completely digitize the UN from September to October.
 Can be done, has completely different implications, completely different questions of regulatory
 and brings completely different questions and discussions with it. But we should, as representatives of an open society,
 not be afraid of this discussion, even with technocratic, administrative, autocratic forms of decision making,
 but use them in the right form for us.
 There are some viewers who do not yet have this trust in your idea of open society, in the sense that we can do this quickly enough to keep a living planet.
 I would put it differently.
 We have to get this on the way in the next 10 to 20 years. Yes, but look, which of the two social constellations we are talking about today is actually the more flexible, the more adaptable, the more innovative, the faster, the more error-friendly? decides what to do and then maybe the world's biggest hunger strike has occurred.
 Or maybe a man, a child policy comes out with massive negative effects.
 Or a society that has internal feedback processes, critical decisions, public forums,
 a healthy social capital, an investigative press.
 Such and similar discussions as we are having here today, Thilo,
 would not be possible in digital autocracies.
 I would not dare to talk about things in a non-open society
 as we are doing here today.
 And these are achievements that are difficult to build up, but very quickly to lose again.
 What can we learn from China?
 We can learn from China the that we also need mechanisms on the level of the constitutional mechanism, on the level of the constitutional rank,
 which allow administratively technocratic decisions to be made in the individual case that are democratically legitimized. A classic example is now Covid. We will, and that is the great advantage of the German constitution with a three-part
 body of law, that we can make decisions about these democratically legitimized body of law
 subsidiary upwards and downwards, which are partly technocratic,
 are also technocratic in that virologists tell us
 you have to put 1.50 meters away.
 That sounds a bit alber and strange and difficult and not understandable and so on.
 And yet it must be such and similar elements and similar ones
 also legitimized by right-wing mechanisms,
 such and similar mechanisms are similar mechanisms in open societies.
 We can learn that.
 But with us they are parliamentary, democratic legitimized
 and with us they are scientific, i.e. scientific based
 and are open to constant critical discussion.
 This is not foreseen in digital autocracies. This is not seen.
 Where, I wonder, the debate at the point, although I understand it, where should a party
 function? At the very top, wherever. Have more information than what is provided to an open society in a fear-free critical discourse.
 Why should he have the information?
 He can only take it from there.
 He can never, and never, Thilo, generate it from himself.
 Why should he be interested in that at all?
 He has a great interest in self-stabilization. A classic example is Covid. A potential
 misjudgment of this pandemic, a potential misjudgment of price formation on the
 financial markets, in the short sale as well as in the long buy, a potential misjudgment
 of risk analysis in the real estate market, a potential misjudgment in the way in which people are developed intelligently and creatively
 creates dependencies and instabilities that make the whole system unstable.
 Like in America right now.
 Yes, I would go so far as to say that we are currently not on the way to an open society in the United States at the moment.
 We experience that in many ways.
 But many Americans know that too and fight for it.
 Indeed.
 I wanted to talk about the Club of Rome.
 What do you want to know?
 The time is already over. We are at 1h45 I think.
 I think we'll just do it another time.
 You already offered yourself earlier, we'll meet again in a year, in half a year.
 And maybe let the audience first sack what you have now
 brought us here intellectually.
 And then we'll see each other again.
 Yes, I hope it wasn't an overstatement for you or the listeners.
 I had a lot of fun.
 And if we can continue the discussion in this way,
 then I'm happy to be there again and again.
 Basically, I have to be a little bit concerned about understanding.
 Absolutely.
 Or challenge you a little bit.
 Absolutely, it was very successful. Thank you very much.
 And I thank you for your time, for this extraordinary place where we were allowed to shoot.
 And I thank the audience, because we are not commercial, but we are dependent on the financial support of each individual.
 Whoever watches this and wants to support it voluntarily, he can do it and does it.
 And who supported us with at least 20 euros last month,
 is now running a gap.
 Thank you Stefan.
 Thank you.
 Thanks to everyone.
 Bye bye. Thank you. so Thank you. you